2018-19 SCHOOL COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (SCEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 07X473 School Name: MOTT HAVEN VILLAGE PREPARATORY HIGH SCHOOL Principal: MELANIE WILLIAMS 2018-19 SCEP-FF 1  School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) Section 4: SCEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 SCEP-FF 2  Section 1: School Information Page School Information School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Mott Haven Village Preparatory High School 07X473 9 – 12 School Number (DBN): 07X473 701 St Anns Avenue, Bronx, NY 10455 718-402-0571 718-665-2363 Phone Number: Tameika Solomon Fax: Email Address: Tsolomon2@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Geographical District: 07 Superintendent’s Office Address: Melanie S Williams Collwyn Harris Alpha Diallo Melissa Cohen Mahommed Diallo Destiny Garcia Megan Diallo n/a District Information Carron Staple Superintendent: 1 Fordham Plaza, Bronx, NY cstaple@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718 741-5834 Phone Number: 718-741-7685 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) 2018-19 SCEP-FF 3  Bronx FSC: Executive Director’s Office Address: Executive Director: JoseRuiz 1 FordhamPlaza, Bronx, NY 10458 Executive Director’s Email Address: jruiz2@schools.nyc.gov Phone Number: 718-828-7776 Fax: 718-828-6280 2018-19 SCEP-FF 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the SCEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Melanie S Williams Collwyn Harris Alpha Diallo MahamadDiallo Destiny Garcia Megan Diallo n/a Melissa Cohen TameikaPearl *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/ teacher Member/ teacher Member/ Assistant Principal 2018-19 SCEP-FF 5  Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Melissa Ortiz Yolanda Molina Member/ parent Member/ parent Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ 2018-19 SCEP-FF 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the School Comprehensive Educational Plan The School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) is a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. The process of developing and implementing the SCEP is aligned to the Framework for Great Schools. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding SCEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and informed by New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department has established programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students supports to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and SCEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint for continuous improvement that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to increase student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a 2018-19 SCEP-FF 7  comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five (5) goals and action plans that align with the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. Accountability Tools and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is informed by the New York State Education Department’s (NYSED) Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) Tenets, the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Rubric, School Quality Guide and other quantitative and qualitative data tools. NYSED’s Six DTSDE Tenets To strengthen the existing system, the NYSED has developed a tool that captures the best practices from each of the current tools called the Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness. This new tool encompasses multiple instruments such as interviews, classroom observations and surveys. The protocol will begin with a clear and cogent statement of the optimal conditions of an effective school and the instruments comprising the protocol will measure how close or far away a particular school is to the optimal conditions identified. Once reviewed, the school and district will create a strategic plan to address the areas in need of improvement. All current Priority and Focus Schools and Focus Districts must use the tool; districts that are required to submit District Comprehensive Improvement Plans and Comprehensive Educational Plans also will use the tool. The DTSDE protocol includes a rubric, which identifies clear and coherent expectations of the optimal conditions of an effective school and school district across the following six tenets:  Tenet 1: District Leadership and Capacity  Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions  Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support  Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions  Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health, and  Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality 2018-19 SCEP-FF 8  Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The 2017-18 Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) I. II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Structures for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the SCEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the SCEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. Next Steps for SCEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: In Part 1A of the Section 5: Needs Assessment indicate the Statement of Practice (SOP) from the DTSDE Tenets that will be addressed in the action plan. Schools that received an Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) School Review should use the recommendations from the review to select their SOPs. Schools that did not undergo an IIT review should select SOPs informed by the major findings/recommendations from your most recent Quality Review (QR) or Central-led Review (CLR), and other qualitative and quantitative data. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 9   Step 4: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 5: Build consensus around activities, strategies and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 6: Implement at least one USDE Turnaround Principle (e.g., redesign the school day, week, or year; modify the instructional program to ensure it is Evidence-based, rigorous, and aligned with State academic content standards; provide time for collaboration on the use of) beginning no later than the 2018-19 school year.  Step 7: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 8: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 10  Section 4: SCEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Mott Haven Village Preparatory High School’s mission is grounded in A.C.R.G . (Attendance, Credit Accumulation, Regents Passing Rates and Graduation Rates). Specifically, our mission is to: ● Collaborate with teachers, instructional coaches, administration, CBOs and Montefiore Clinic to improve overall student achievement in Attendance, Credit Accumulation, Regents Passing Rates and Graduation Rates. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. Mott Haven Village Preparatory High School is a conceptually consolidated school, following the small school model. Our unique characteristics are (but not limited to): ● Small school population (approx. 370 students; 28 teachers) allows more opportunity to collaborate and interact with students on an individual level. ● Weekly full-staff professional development provides a forum to relay information, share best practices, etc. ● Weekly grade team meetings during which staff members review cohort specific data grounded in Attendance, Credit Accumulation and/or Regents Passing Rates ● Weekly time for instructional department meetings is built into the schedule; therefore allowing additional time for “like subjects” to collaborate regarding instruction, pedagogy, best practices, etc. ● Advisory sessions during which students meet with their advisor regarding academic progress towards graduation Our strategic collaborations/partnerships are as follows (but not limited to): ● Our CBO (East Side House Settlement) provides the staff to teach College/Career Readiness to 11 th and 12 th graders. Additionally they provide after-school and/or lunch programs to assist students with college readiness, leadership development, communication skills and relationship building. The CBO also provides a Career Counselor providing paid internships for students (11th and 12th graders). ● Montefiore Clinic is on the 3 rd floor of our school building and is available for physical and mental support as a free service to registered students. ● LYFE Center is on the 1 st floor of our school building and provides free child-care for our students who are also parents. Our special initiatives being implemented are as follows (but not limited to): ● Saturday Academy provides additional instruction to students on an as needed basis (10am – 2pm; Saturdays). ● Academic Boot Camp provides additional instruction to smaller groups of students (after-school on Tuesday, Wednesday and Thursdays). ● Progress Reports – Students receive Progress Reports from Jupiter Grades halfway between Report Card distribution dates. This way, they are able to see, address and improve grades before it officially appears on their report cards. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 11  ● Jupiter Grades / Kinvolved – Students, parents and staff have 24/7 access into their child’s academic progress, behavior in class, attendance, etc. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. Special Populations – Considering that we are an unscreened school, Mott Haven Village Prep generally has the following special population of students with additional needs: ● Special Education – Generally 1/3 of our student population have an IEP – In order to properly service this sub-group, it is vital that we have the appropriate ICT teachers, mandated counselors, accommodations, differentiated instruction, etc. to serve SWDs. ● ELLs – Generally 2/10 of our student population are English Language Learners – In order to properly service this sub-group, it is vital that we have the appropriate ESL teacher to provide language acquisition skills in addition to academic support in other subject areas. - High Achieving Students - for high achieving students who are able to progress quickly, MHVP offers AP Courses, Honors Courses and Peer Group Connection (a mentorship program dedicated to helping 9th grade students acclimate to high school successfully) - Teen Parents - For our teen parents, we have a Lyfe Center on the 1st floor. As long as students attend school, they are eligible to receive free child care for their children up to 5 years old. - Economically Disadvantaged - economically disadvantaged students (including homeless youth) are supported by physical wellness checks by social workers, guidance counselors, administrators, etc. MHVP also provides these students with additional uniform shirts (free of charge), school supplies, snacks, etc. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. Regarding the Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools, we celebrate progress in the following areas: ● Supportive Environment – considering our small school model, we are proud to have a supportive environment in which students feel individually known and cared about by staff. Students are able to identify at least one staff member whom they feel confident speaking with regarding school, home, stress, college, etc. - Also aligned with Supportive Environment, each student has an advisor with whom he/she meets weekly. These meetings are grounded in academic case conferencing (attendance, grades, behavior, progress towards graduation, etc.) and social-emotional support (utilizing lessons from the Foundations: 7 Habits Planner). Lessons include (but are not limited to:) Building Integrity, Self Awareness, Self Management, Social Awareness, Relationship Skills, Responsible Decision Making, etc.). ● Collaborative Teachers – In addition to weekly Full Staff and Grade Team Meetings, our schedule accommodates Department/Subject Meetings to occur during the school day. Teachers are committed to using to using this time to improve classroom instruction and overall school achievement. - We also have 4 Lead Teachers who work to support new teachers, facilitate peer intervisitations, plan and coordinate staff PD, etc. Our focus area for this year is: 2018-19 SCEP-FF 12  ● Rigorous Instruction – Our school still struggles greatly on an academic level. Although administration has provided and encourages use of Study Island and other Common Core/Regents aligned materials, we are still working diligently to align classroom instruction with city/state expectations. 5. Identify at least one USDE Turnaround Principle (e.g., redesign the school day, week, or year; modify the instructional program to ensure it is Evidence-based, rigorous, and aligned with State academic content standards; provide time for collaboration on the use of data) to be implemented in the 2018-19 school year. In order to combat chronic lateness, we implemented a Morning Rotation, during which morning classes rotate. As such, students who are chronically late to 1st period may have an opportunity to salvage credit because that class occurs during different periods each day. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 13  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 07X473 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 09,10,11,12 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 358 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 4 4 8 6 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 12 12 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 92.0% % Attendance Rate 90.5% % Reduced Lunch 19.8% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.3% 72.3% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 0.8% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 5.33 0% 15% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation 64% 60% 50.5% 1.0% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No No Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups Hispanic, ED Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A NO N/A N/A NO Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A NO N/A N/A NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A YES N/A N/A YES No N/A 123 117 1 77.0% 2.0% 28.5% 24.6% 0.6% 1.7% 2 23% 6.4 N/A N/A 65% 62% 70.0% 4% N/A No Yes N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A NO N/A N/A N/A N/A NO N/A N/A N/A N/A YES 2018-19 SCEP-FF 14  2018-19 SCEP-FF 15  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 3 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 3.2 The school leader ensures and supports the quality implementation of a systematic plan of rigorous and coherent curricula appropriately aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS) that is monitored and adapted to meet the needs of students. Teachers develop and ensure that unit and lesson plans used include data-driven instruction (DDI) protocols that are appropriately aligned to the CCLS and NYS content standards and address student achievement needs. The school leader and teachers have developed a comprehensive plan for teachers to partner within and across all grades and subjects to create interdisciplinary curricula targeting the arts, technology, and other enrichment opportunities. Teachers implement a comprehensive system for using formative and summative assessments for strategic short and long-range curriculum planning that involves student reflection, tracking of, and ownership of learning. 3.3 3.4 3.5 SOP(s) Addressed X Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Strengths – Supportive Environment, Collaborative Teachers, Effective School Leadership Needs – 1. Rigorous Instruction: Utilizing our NYCDOE Progress Report and Quality Review, it is apparent that students are not accumulating credits on a regular basis in a manner that would ensure timely graduation. Of the students who are accumulating credits, many struggle with successfully passing applicable Regents exams. Our priority is to refine curriculum in a way that provides more access to the curriculum for all students, by using rigorous tasks closely aligned to City/State expectations. 2. Strong Family Ties: Although School Survey results demonstrate positive responses from parents, their participation in monthly meetings, parent teacher conferences, workshops, etc. remain extremely low (averaging 10 parents or less). Our priority is to conduct a needs assessment, identify topics of interest, incentives for attendance and feasible meeting times for parents. Part 2 – Annual Goal 2018-19 SCEP-FF 16  Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, at least 90% of teachers will effectively engage students in learning aligned with Common Core and key instructional shifts as evidenced by increased student credit accumulation from 69.3% to 75%. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 17  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Professional Development: principal, ap and lead teacher August/ September Principal, AP and lead teacher - Principal, AP and lead teacher assess unit plans across departments to norm instructional expectations and feedback regarding the use of the Danielson's framework with teachers - This is done on a continuous basis (i.e. in PD, within departments, etc.) - All teachers submitted fall semester's unit plans and corresponding assessments and rubrics by Tuesday, June 26th. All teachers September and February Principal, AP and lead teacher - Teachers will receive individual feedback from principal, AP or lead teacher regarding CC alignment of assessments, Study Island assessment questions, rubrics, exemplars, etc. as per the State's IIT Review recommendations. - Based on the feedback teachers receive from peers and/or admin, teachers will revise curriculum maps and unit plans to reflect closer alignment to CCLS and NYS Regents expectations. - Teachers will attend a series of professional development sessions during the weekly 80 minute Monday PD focused on applying the Danielson's framework to assess alignment of units to CCLS, key shifts, assessments, etc. - Through the implementation of the Danielson's norming, teachers will receive feedback regarding the Instructional supports embedded in unit plans provided to subgroups (specifically ELLs and SWDs). Danielson's framework will be used to evaluate All teachers October, February Administration, PD Committee 2018-19 SCEP-FF 18  differentiated texts, performance tasks and multiple entry points to demonstrate mastery of content/skills. - Department chairs are trained in a "train the trainer" model to teach the Danielson's framework and will turnkey that knowledge to teachers within their departments. - In order to address the needs of all learners, we also offer Saturday Academy, Afterschool Academic Boot Camp and online APEX courses as supplemental instruction. During this time, there are certified ESL and SWD teachers working directly with ENLs and SWDs (in addition to the GenEd teachers). 3b – Parent and Family Engagement lowest third students and/or any students who previously failed a Regents October - June 1 teacher from each core subject area 1 ESL teacher 1 IEP teacher How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. In addition to the monthly parent meetings and workshops, there will be 3 parent meetings throughout the school year (September, December and May) grounded in accessing Study Island, Jupitergrades.com, Regentsprep.org, etc. as a way to enforce the study skills taught at school. The key personnel responsible for these workshops are the Parent Coordinator, Lead Teacher, Subject-Specific Teacher, Assistant Principal and Principal. We will use Kinvolved attendance/communication portal in order to engage parents electronically (i.e. text, robocall, email, etc.) regarding their child's behavior, attendance, grades, etc. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Tax Levy, P/F, Title 1 SWP and/or Title 1 1003 will be used to fund staff salaries, per session activities, order additional textbooks, technology, instructional material, etc. to ensure that staff have the required materials to facilitate this goal. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy X Title I SWP X Title I TA Title I 1003(a) Title III PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant X 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By January 2019, teachers will use the the feedback from their first two classroom observations to assess and/or revise learning tasks to ensure that students are showing evidence of learning (3c Danielson), as measured by classroom observation data from Advance Web Application. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 19  Staff members not meeting this goal will receive one-on-one coaching from the Principal, AP or Lead Teacher to facilitate the revision of the existing and future unit plans. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Danielson's Framework for Teaching Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 20  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 5 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 5.2 The school leader establishes overarching systems and understandings of how to support and sustain student social and emotional developmental health and academic success. 5.3 The school articulates and systematically promotes a vision for social and emotional developmental health that is aligned to a curriculum or program that provides learning experiences and a safe and healthy school environment for families, teachers, and students. 5.4 All school stakeholders work together to develop a common understanding of the importance of their contributions in creating a school community that is safe, conducive to learning, and fostering of a sense of ownership for providing social and emotional developmental health supports tied to the school’s vision. 5.5 The school leader and student support staff work together with teachers to establish structures to support the use of data to respond to student social and emotional developmental health needs. SOP(s) Addressed X Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? Strengths – Montefiore Clinic, LYFE Center, Grade Level and Subject Team Meetings, Advisory Needs – Strengthening the maintenance of PBIS by utilizing the LiveSchool platform and encouraging staff/students to utilize PBIS regularly (i.e purchase school "gear" with SOAR bucks). - Additional attendance-based interventions Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools –Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 100% of students and staff members will participate in Positive Behavior Intervention Supports (via LiveSchool tracking) at least once per week, resulting in at least 10% decrease in suspensions. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 21  2018-19 SCEP-FF 22  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). - Teachers will receive professional development sessions regarding effective communication with students, de-escalation strategies and school-based incentives during the weekly 80 minute Monday PD focused on applying the PBIS strategies to improve overall school culture. - Once a month, the school will host events such as field trips, assemblies, town halls, ice cream socials, etc. based on data regarding students' attendance, grades, PBIS (SOAR bucks accumulation), etc. to engage in a reward system promoting a positive school environment. - Social worker and guidance counselor will work with SWDs receiving mandated counseling to provide incentives as earned regarding attendance, grades and positive behaviors demonstrated. Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Students September, November, March Teachers, guidance counselor, social worker and dean Students and teachers Administration, guidance counselor, social worker and Dean October, November, December, January, February, March, April, May - As per the NYS IIT Review's recommendation to improve student/parent/teacher communication, the school is shifting the advisory program to a new structure in which every teacher will have 15 advisees that they loop with over the course of four years. Parents and staff Weekly, beginning September 24th Administration and Parent Coordinator - It is expected that advisors communicate with advisees and their parents via Kinvolved regarding students' performance, attendance, behavior, etc. This will occur every Tuesday afternoon, during contractual Parental Involvement time. Students will also receive weekly updates of their SOAR "pay check" so that they are aware of their "bank balance" and may use it to purchase school paraphernalia. - Teachers will reflect on the existing Classroom Management Plans submitted during the 2018-2019 school year and revise as applicable based on observation feedback in domain 2. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement all teachers September, February teachers, administration 2018-19 SCEP-FF 23  How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. In order to engage families and empower them to support their children at home, there will be 2 parent meetings throughout the school year (October, January) grounded in accessing/tracking PBIS Soar Bucks, purchasing school gear, communicating with teachers, etc. as a way to enforce the behavioral and academic expectations taught at school. The key personnel responsible for these workshops are the Parent Coordinator, Lead Teacher, Subject-Specific Teacher, Assistant Principal and Principal. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Tax Levy, P/F, Title 1 SWP and/or Title 1 1003 will be used to fund staff salaries, per session activities, order additional school apparel/paraphernalia, PBIS professional development registration, etc. to ensure that staff have the required materials to facilitate this goal. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy X Title I SWP X Title I TA Title I 1003(a) Title III PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant X 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By the end of January 2019, administration will facilitate mid-year check-ins with 100% of staff members to assess adherence to PBIS Strategies, Classroom Management Plans and Jupiter Grades/ Kinvolved communication protocols as evidenced by reduced referrals and classroom observations. Teacher will receive actionable feedback on their progress in these areas. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. PBIS LiveSchool tracking, OORS data Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 24  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 4 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 4.2 School and teacher leaders ensure that instructional practices and strategies are organized around annual, unit, and daily lesson plans that address all student goals and needs. 4.3 Teachers provide coherent, and appropriately aligned Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS)-based instruction that leads to multiple points of access for all students. 4.4 Teachers and students work together to implement a program/plan to create a learning environment that is responsive to students’ varied experiences and tailored to the strengths and needs of all students. SOP(s) Addressed X 4.5 Teachers inform planning and foster student participation in their own learning process by using a variety of summative and formative data sources (e.g., screening, interim measures, and progress monitoring). Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Strengths – Team meetings are frequent and scheduled into daily programming (department meetings, grade level meetings and full staff meetings). Teachers use Study Island, Engage NY, Castle Learning, RegentsPrep, etc. to plan units/lessons and share best practices with peers at aforementioned meetings. Needs – Provide additional services to Gen-Ed students who also struggle academically. A large number of our students have reading comprehension deficiencies. We are working to provide more methods by which to teach and improve literacy. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. In order to increase the effectiveness of teaching practices across the school, by June 2019, 100% of teachers will participate in the non-evaluative Peer Intervention Observation/Feedback Cycle, grounded in Danielson's effective teacher framework, at least six (6) times per academic year (three visits in the fall, three visits in the spring). 2018-19 SCEP-FF 25  2018-19 SCEP-FF 26  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) - Professional Development: All teachers September, February PD Committee, Dean, Teachers and administration - As per the NYS IIT Review recommendations, teachers will participate in a series of professional development sessions regarding explicit directions and modeling for students prior to assigning instructional tasks. - Teachers will participate in a series of professional development sessions regarding Danielson's component 3c, emphasizing Checks for Understanding. All teachers October, March PD Committee, Dean, Teachers and administration - As per the NYS IIT Review recommendations, It is expected that each lesson include 1 - 3 checks for understanding. - Both, during teacher teams and individual planning-time, teachers will review the data provided from the Checks for Understanding to identify students in need of additional instructional support (i.e. Saturday Academy, After School Academy, Wilson Reading, etc.). - Teachers will participate in a series of professional development sessions regarding Danielson's component 3b, emphasizing higher-order thinking questions. - As per the NYS IIT Review recommendations, It is expected that each lesson include 3 - 5 higher-order thinking questions (of which at least 2 are written by students). All teachers October, March PD Committee, Dean, Teachers and administration All teachers October, March PD Committee, Teachers and administration 2018-19 SCEP-FF 27  - Teachers will participate in a series of professional development sessions regarding collaborative student activities (group work). - As per the NYS IIT Review recommendations, It is expected that each lesson include at least 1 collaborative student activity in order to improve engagement. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. In order to engage families and promote teacher-parent collaborations to support their children at home, there will be 2 parent meetings throughout the school year (October, January) grounded in accessing/tracking students' progress on Jupiter Grades, communicating with teachers, etc. as a way to enforce the behavioral and academic expectations taught at school. The key personnel responsible for these workshops are the Parent Coordinator, Lead Teacher, Subject-Specific Teacher, Assistant Principal and Principal. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Tax Levy, P/F, Title 1 SWP, PTA Funded and/or Title 1 1003 will be used to fund staff salaries, per session activities, order additional school apparel/paraphernalia, PBIS professional development registration, etc. to ensure that staff have the required materials to facilitate this goal. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy X Title I SWP X Title I TA Title I 1003(a) Title III PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant X 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By January 2019, at least 100% of teachers will have participate in at least three (3) non-evaluative Peer Intervention Observation/Feedback Cycles, grounded in Danielson's effective teacher framework. One-on-one coaching (with administration or the Lead Teacher) will be provided to teachers that have not met this expectation. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 28  Teacher Feedback, passing rates, Classroom Observations, Lesson Plans Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 29  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 2 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 2.2 The school leader ensures that the school community shares the Specific, Measurable, Ambitious, Results-oriented, and Timely (SMART) goals/mission and long-term vision inclusive of core values that address the priorities outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP). Leaders make strategic decisions to organize programmatic, human, and fiscal capital resources. 2.3 2.4 The school leader has a fully functional system in place aligned to the district's Annual Professional Performance Review (APPR) to conduct targeted and frequent observation and track progress of teacher practices based on student data and feedback. 2.5 Leaders effectively use evidence-based systems and structures to examine and improve critical individual and school-wide practices as defined in the SCEP (student achievement, curriculum and teacher practices; leadership development; community/family engagement; and student social and emotional developmental health). X SOP(s) Addressed Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Strengths – School leader communicates a clear, concise vision grounded in improvement of ACRG (Attendance, Credit Accumulation, Regents Passing Rates and Graduation Rates); School leader ensures that programming meets the needs of the students (i.e. programmed for the appropriate classes to ensure progress toward graduation); School leader uses capital resources effectively to purchase educational software, technology, pay for per session opportunities etc. to improve instruction in the classroom. Needs – School leader (and assistant principals) need to create and adhere to a Teacher Observation/Feedback Cycle that provides more frequent visits (by admin and/or peers) and timely feedback to teachers. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART– Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 30  In order to ensure school-wide instructional expectations are fully implemented by all teachers, by June 2019, school leaders will observe teachers at least six (6) times (three in the fall, three in the spring) and will provide targeted written feedback within one (1) week of the observation. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 31  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) - School leader will create a Teacher Observation/Feedback Cycle Calendar. Administration August Administration - School Leader will share the calendar with the Assistant Principals and strategically decide which teachers to see during which times. - School leader will run Advance Reports to identify common threads amongst teachers. Administration, Lead Teacher October, December, March, May Administration, Lead Teacher, Teachers - New and struggling teachers will receive additional observations from the Lead Teachers (in between administration's observations). - School leader will monitor instruction through daily or weekly walk-throughs to ensure that classroom activities implement written plans and include the expected higher order questions, checks for understanding and collaborative activities, as recommended by NYS IIT's Review. Administration Ongoing Administration, Lead Teacher, Teachers - As per NYS IIT Review recommendations, school leader will provide teachers with a series of professional development sessions regarding the creation of Data Walls. Teachers and Students November, March Administration, PD Committee, Teachers - Color-coded Data Walls that contain students' credit accumulation, Regents data, current class grades and attendance will be created and displayed outside of the main office. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. In order to engage families and promote parent leadership to support their children at home, there will be 2 parent meetings throughout the school year (October, January) grounded in instructional expectations in the classroom, 2018-19 SCEP-FF 32  color coded Data Walls and how parents may leverage Jupiter Grades to track/monitor their child's progress towards graduation. The key personnel responsible for these workshops are the Parent Coordinator, Lead Teacher, Guidance Counselors, Assistant Principal and Principal. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Tax Levy, P/F, Title 1 SWP and/or Title 1 1003 will be used to fund staff salaries, per session activities, network and/or borough based professional development, etc. to ensure that staff have the required knowledge/skillset to facilitate this goal. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy X Title I SWP X Title I TA Title I 1003(a) Title III PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant X 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By January 2019 administration and peers will have observed teachers at least six times (three times by admin, three times by peers) and provided feedback within 1 week. Administration will adjust schedules to make sure this is met and therefore, ensuring that we are on target to reach the full goal by the end of the school year. Administration will provide a Mid-Year Check In for teachers based on the Measures of Teacher Practice ratings (from Advance) and evidence from daily/weekly walk-throughs. Based on the data provided, administration will adjust support for teachers to enhance instructional improvements. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. School-Based Report from Advance Web Application, School Leader's Anecdotals from Daily or Weekly Walk-Throughs, Data displayed from Data Walls, Peer Intervisitation Feedback (Teacher to Teacher) Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 33  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 6 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 6.2 The school leader ensures that regular communication with students and families fosters their high expectations for student academic achievement. 6.3 The school engages in effective planning and reciprocal communication with family and community stakeholders so that student strength and needs are identified and used to augment learning. 6.4 The school community partners with families and community agencies to promote and provide training across all areas (academic and social and emotional developmental health) to support student success. 6.5 The school shares data in a way that promotes dialogue among parents, students, and school community members centered on student learning and success and encourages and empowers families to understand and use data to advocate for appropriate support services for their children. X SOP(s) Addressed Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Strengths – Jupiter Grades, Advisory, Grade Team Meetings, Subject Team Meetings, Parent Teacher Conferences, PTA Meetings, SLT Meetings, Incoming Freshmen Orientation, Mandatory Parent Meeting Mid Year Needs – Develop more relationships with CBOs (in addition to East Side House Settlement); increase the number of parents that come out to Family Events, workshops, etc. (i.e. GED, ESL, Immigration Attorney for parents, etc.) Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. In order to improve parent engagement, by June 2019, 100% of staff will effectively communicate with parents regarding academics, behavior, and attendance at least every three (3) weeks, as evidenced by Kinvolved usage and Jupiter Grades. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 34  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) - As per NYS IIT Review recommendations, the school leader and Parent Coordinator will collaborate to develop the Parent Coordinator's professional duties, identify goals and create an action plan to achieve those goals. Parent Coordinator, Parents and Students August Parent Coordinator, Principal - Based on the professional duties/goals created in August, Parent Coordinator will create a Needs Assessment for parents to gather data on their interests. - Parent Coordinator will collaborate with the CBO (East Side House Settlement) and Montefiore Clinic on the 3rd floor to plan and facilitate parent workshops based on the results of the Needs Assessment (i.e. academic, social/emotional, technology and/or college processes). - Teachers will receive Professional Development on accessing and using Rosetta Stone to enhance communication skills and improve conversations with parents regarding their child's grades/attendance/behavior, etc. Parents September Parent Coordinator Parents September, October Parents September Parent Coordinator, East Side House, Montefiore Clinic, Principal Teachers, Parent Coordinator and Assistant Principal 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. East Side House Settlement Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Tax Levy, P/F, Title 1 SWP, PTA Funded and/or Title 1 1003 will be used to fund staff salaries, per session activities, order additional school apparel/paraphernalia, PBIS professional development registration, etc. to ensure that staff have the required materials to facilitate this goal. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy X Title I SWP X Title I TA Title I 1003(a) Title III PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant X 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other 2018-19 SCEP-FF 35  Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By January 2019, administration, parent coordinator, and teachers will utilize Kinvolved, Translation Services and/or Rosetta Stone at least once every 3 weeks to converse with parents regarding their child's performance at school, as evidenced by usage reports and parental contact logs. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Workshop Event Calendar, Attendance sheets, Needs Assessment Results, Usage Reports from Rosetta Stone, Contact Logs from Kinvolved Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 36  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Mathematics Science Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Students currently failing course and/or Students that have taken and previously failed the NYS Regents in this subject area Students currently failing course and/or Students that have taken and previously failed the NYS Regents in this subject area Students currently failing course and/or Students that have taken and previously failed the NYS Regents in this subject area Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) Study Island or Castle Learning Regents Prep Small group instruction Repeated Instruction in a smaller group Wilson Reading Program MyOnIndependent Reading Study Island or Castle Learning Regents Prep Repeated Instruction in a smaller group Small group instruction Study Island or Castle Learning Regents Prep Small group instruction Repeated Instruction in a smaller group When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Afterschool Academy (Tuesday, Wednesday and Thursdays 2:30pm – 4:30pm) Saturday Academy (10am – 2pm) Afterschool Academy (Tuesday, Wednesday and Thursdays 2:30pm – 4:30pm) Saturday Academy (10am – 2pm) Afterschool Academy (Tuesday, Wednesday and Thursdays 2:30pm – 4:30pm) Saturday Academy (10am – 2pm) 2018-19 SCEP-FF 37 Study Island or Castle Learning Regents Prep Small group instruction Repeated Instruction in a smaller group Varies as needed (see column to the left) Varies as needed and/or required in IEP (see column to the left) Afterschool Academy (Tuesday, Wednesday and Thursdays 2:30pm – 4:30pm) Saturday Academy (10am – 2pm) Varies as needed and/or required in IEP Social Studies At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Students currently failing course and/or Students that have taken and previously failed the NYS Regents in this subject area Guidance Counselor = meets periodically with students that are “at risk” behaviorally, socially and academically (referred by administration and/or staff). In collaboration with administration, they review students’ transcripts, map credit recovery opportunities for students, etc. School Psychologist = After reviewing student’s profile during our PPT meetings, students are referred for assessment and evaluations to determine applicable services. Students may also be referred to the Montefiore Clinic for mental health services. Social Worker = Students are referred to meet with the Social Worker by administration, teachers, support staff and/or Special Education mandated related services. Health Related Services = Social 2018-19 SCEP-FF 38  Worker, Counselor and School Aide are trained, designated health resource coordinators that give health related information to students regarding HIV, AIDs, STDs and/or safe sex through our Condom Availability Program. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 39  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 26 students appear on the ATS report for Students in Temporary Housing 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. The $100/per student in temporary housing is utilized to provide clothing (i.e. uniforms, sweatshirts, sweatpants, school supplies, bookbags, etc.). We also plan to target the STH parents regarding workshops that may improve their quality of life (i.e. GED services, resume writing, ESL, etc.). Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). n/a 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 40  n/a 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. n/a 2018-19 SCEP-FF 41  Section 8: Title I Program Information Directions:  All schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. Strategies for Recruitment: - Hiring Committee (comprised of administration and at least one teacher) - Required Demo Lesson for interview finalists; completed with real current students who all provide informal feedback to administration regarding the lesson - Relationship Building/Networking with programs like Teach for America, The Teaching Fellows, LEAP, NYCLA and/or City College, etc. Strategies for Retention and Support: - Assigned mentors - Peer Observations - Assistant Principal and Principal Support - New Teacher Training with Lead Teacher - Teachers of Tomorrow Incentive Pay for Eligible Teachers - Field Borough Support Team 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the strategies and activities for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, staff, and paraprofessionals that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). 2018-19 SCEP-FF 42  - Encouraged school-provided, district-provided and/or off-site Professional Development. - Administration and Lead Teacher consistently send out PD invitations to staff as they come available. - Staff are encouraged to attend and when funding allows, administration covers registration, travel, lodging, etc. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. n/a 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). n/a Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/information, early intervention services, etc.). n/a 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. Teachers meet in Grade Level Team Meetings, Subject Based Meetings and Full Staff Meetings to evaluate assessment measures, examine and decide on the appropriate use of said assessments. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds enables, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (SCEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Funding Amount Indicate the amount Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and 2018-19 SCEP-FF 43  Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Title I Part A (Basic) Title I School Improvement 1003(a) Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funds Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Federal Federal Local contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) 377,195.00 0 12,366 0 3,010,386 purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) X X X Column B Section Reference(s) Section 5 Section 6 Section 5 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows: 2018-19 SCEP-FF 44   Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I School Improvement 1003(a): To support implementation of school improvement activities identified through the Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) reviews or a school review with district oversight and included in the DCIP/SCEP.  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: To support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs.  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan.  Title I Priority and Focus School Parent Engagement Set-aside: Additional set-aside is to enable greater and  more meaningful parent participation in the education of their children. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.  Grant funds awarded via a competitive process, including Title I 1003(g) SIG funds: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 45  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. Mott Haven Village Preparatory High School is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Mott Haven Village Preparatory High School will support parents and families of Title I students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students  providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math and use of technology;  providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and  decision making in support of the education of their children; fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress;  providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments;  sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand;  providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; Parental Involvement and School Quality 2018-19 SCEP-FF 46  The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability grade-level curriculum and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, Progress Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Every Student Succeeds Act; ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings, with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; 2018-19 SCEP-FF 47  ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement  holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference;  hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year;  encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; supporting or hosting Family Day events;   establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents;  encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers;  providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress;  developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress;  providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between /teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) Mott Haven Village Preparatory High School , in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards;  using academic learning time efficiently;    offering high quality instruction in all content areas;  providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: 2018-19 SCEP-FF 48     conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education;  providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact;   providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information;  ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff  ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents;  notifying parents of the procedures to meet with their child’s teacher or other school staff member;  arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities;  planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; Provide general support to parents by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents    creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering will all members of the school community; supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents;   ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as  described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities 2018-19 SCEP-FF 49  Parent Responsibilities: ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; 2018-19 SCEP-FF 50  ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 51  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 2018-19 SCEP-FF 52  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: In addition to the daily coursework, ENL students also receive integrated instruction (via Part 154 in ELA courses; English 1, 3, 5 and 7). These courses provide a General Ed ELA teacher and a specialized ESL teacher to provide curriculum access to all students. Of the 78 ENL students currently enrolled as of July 2018,: - 19 students are "entering" (24%) - 7 students are "emerging" (9%) - 21 students are "transitioning" (27%) - 31 students are "expanding" (40%) Our supplemental instructional program is grounded in the goal of every ENL student progressing at least one (1) proficiency level as evidenced by Spring 2018 NYSESLAT's data. (We have not received the results yet from Spring 2018 NYSESLAT.) Afterschool Academy and Saturday Academy will begin October 2018 to provide additional help with ELA, Math, Social Studies and Science homework, NYSESLAT preparation, upcoming Regents, etc. Sessions will be Wednesday and Thursday (2:30pm - 4pm) and Saturdays (10am - 2pm). Instruction will be conducted mostly in English with sporadic Spanish translations as needed. Materials/resources utilized during these sessions will be (but not limited to): teacher's differentiated lesson plans, Study Island ($3,300), ESL ReadSmart ($1,200), workbooks, notebooks, pencils (supplies at approximately $240) to meet students' needs during the Title III program. 62% of Title III funds will also be used to fund direct supplemental instruction for Saturday Academy and Afterschool Academy: - 9 hours per week for supervisor (principal or assistant principal) for 8 weeks; 9 hours x $56.79 per session with fringes x 8 weeks = $4,088.88 The supervisor's duties will be supervision of students, staff and assisting with applicable parent workshops. - 8 hours per week for ENL teacher for 8 weeks; 8 hours x $55.23 per session with fringes x 8 weeks = $3,534.72 During the Saturday Academy, ESL students will receive smaller, individualized instruction on an as needed basis. Additionally, field trips to enhance content retention will be conducted as well (i.e. Van Cortlandt Manor Museum). This museum trip aligns with the literacy, vocabulary and social studies skills taught during Saturday Academy. Program will continue through 2018-2019. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 53  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: All teachers received professional development weekly (on Mondays) regarding instructional expectations, best practices for students, especially struggling students (i.e. ELLs, SWDs, at-risk populations, etc.). Considering that this is included in teachers' contract, this PD is at no cost to Title III. During the week, staff alternate between Department Meetings and Grade Team Meetings to discuss appropriate differentiation, analyze data, strategize / implement interventions, etc. We have one (2) Title III teachers to accommodate 78 ENL students. Regarding professional development, in addition to full staff pds, they will work with our district's BFSC (at no cost to Title III), attend off-campus PDs and receive in-house training from Assistant Principal (Tameika Solomon) regarding NYSESLAT testing, content support, language acquisition and additional IEP services (if applicable). Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: Parent Association Meetings convene monthly to discuss current happenings at the school level and to provide support to parents assisting students in their studies at home. Throughout the year, PA Meetings cover Jupiter Grades, Castle Learning, Study Island access, ReadSmart ESL, etc. so that parents are more empowered to assist their children at home. Specifically for Title III parents, translators (Mariana Rodriguez; school aide and Anita Burgos; parent coordinator) are available for every meeting. Additionally, we have Title III parent workshops regarding legalization, documentation, available scholarships, financial aid, Dream Act and supporting students at home. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 54 Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ 0 Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. n/a Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits) n/a  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a 2018-19 SCEP-FF 55  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District School Name Mott Haven Preparatory Village H.S. Borough Bronx School Number 473 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Melanie Williams Coach N/A ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Neil Ramer Teacher/Subject Area Michael Lamb Teacher/Subject Area Dennis Colon Related-Service Provider Kirl Santos Superintendent Carron Staple Assistant Principal Tameika Solomon Coach N/A School Counselor Cynthia Leon Parent Parent Coordinator Anita Burgos Field Support Center Staff Member Anita Bushi Other (Name and Title) type here C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 0 2 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 376 2018-19 SCEP-FF 56 Total number of ELLs 65 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 17.29%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 1 4 3 2 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? ELLs are given the periodic assessment as a tool of evaluating the student progress throughout the course of the school year. These assessments include (but not limited to) ScanTron, NYSESLAT and teacher-generated formative and sumative assessment. These assessments assist in the teacher's ability to adjust curriculum to meet the state standards associated with the ENL program. This information informs the overall instruction that is provided within each ENL classroom.The data is collected and the proficiency levels are examined. The proficiency levels of the students are distributed to the teachers on grade levels and those teachers create appropriate instructional plans for that particular grade level. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? Depending on their individual language acquisition levels, students receive instruction via standalone ENL classes as well as integrated co-taught classes with the certified ENL teacher and GenEd teacher for each core subject. Assessments are administered during these classes. Review and analysis of this data is done during ELA/ENL department meetings. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 57  3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? Additionally, students are assessed throughout the year using alternative forms of assessments. Scantron, Rosetta Stone, ESL ReadSmart and the Periodic Assessment provide data throughout the year and allows us to benchmark the progress of our ESL program. The ultimate barometer of the success of our programs are determined and measured by student performance on New York State regents exams and our graduation rate. Additionally, teachers of grade teams do quarterly transcript evaluations to evaluate the students' progress within their cohort to measure credit accumulation and regents performance. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? In addition to adjustments made within classroom lessons, we offer additional interventions of Afterschool Academy, Saturday Academy and extended day to provide additional instructional support in smaller groups. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] N/A 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. Noticeable patterns across different NYSESLAT modalities represent a necessity for instructional changes. The appearance of these patterns facilitate an adjustment in overall curriculum and instructional choices. The patterns appear that most students are deficient in reading and writing. These are the skills that the ENL teacher focuses on primarily for these students. Additionally, the instructor provides additional support in listening and speaking to ensure that students continue to develop in these areas. English proficient students are provided with necessary support past their enrollment in the ENL program. Title III funding and additional in-class support to ensure a smooth transition for these students. Our entire school is comprised of International students. Our incoming 9th graders come "over-the-counter". Therefore, students without a NYSESLAT score are administered the LABR. The data consistently places these students as beginners. This school year 86% were unable to respond to any questions on LABR. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? The ENL teachers administer the assessments and continuously review the findings with administration. Administration analyzes the results and determines what (if any) adjustments are necessary to the Master Schedule to ensure students receive appropriate services. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. In compliance with the New York City Department of Education’s Division of Assessment and Accountability, all modifications for ELLs are implemented for city and state examinations. ELL students are in standalone heterogeneous ESL classes based on their ability levels. The remainder of their program is based on individual academic requirements. The teachers work in collaborative grade and subject teams to assess student needs and 2018-19 SCEP-FF 58  create academic programs for at-risk students. Our classes are departmentalized in order to best serve our students for both credit and regents exams requirements. b. TBE program. If applicable. N/A c. DL program. If applicable. N/A 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? Explicit instruction is delivered by certified ENL teachers and certified ELA teachers with ENL extensions. All of our students receive the mandated ENL/ELA allotted instruction time based on student proficiency levels. In compliance with the New York City Department of Education’s Division of Assessment and Accountability, all modifications for ELLs are implemented for city and state examinations. Students testing "advanced" on the NYSESLAT are programmed for at least 180 minutes of English Language Arts. Our students travel in 45 minute periods and have a heterogeneous mix. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. Content area instruction is delivered in English. We have established a LAP team which includes the principal, Network ELL Compliance Specialist, ENL and ELA teachers, and school counselors. Newly enrolled LEP students receive an array of academic and support services. We offer Regents and SAT prep classes, mandated tutorials in core content areas, Saturday Academy enrichment programs, and a myriad of extra-curricular clubs and sports activities. Our teachers employ the workshop model in our classes and students are grouped with different levels of English within the class. This is done to ensure that content becomes comprehensible and to enrich language development through the students' peers. Content area teachers employ a variety of ELL strategies including but not limited to graphic organizers, annotation, textbooks in multiple native languages, strategic groupings, Rosetta Stone software is available and utilized in all classes, translation dictionaries are in all classes in all languages, and ENL teachers support the ELA curriculum working in conjunction with the ELA teacher on instruction. ENL teachers meet with all content area teachers during common planning time. Content areas of concern are reinforced in ENL classes. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? ELL students receive evaluation in their native language when possible by a certified pedagogue. A large percentage of our incoming students are Spanish speaking. The certified teacher and other teachers with bilingual extensions evaluate the students in their native language for fluency and placement. The methods for evaluation include competency exams, interviews in native language and their ability to speak, listen, write and read in their native languages is monitored by teachers in grade team levels. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status ELL subgroups receive differentiated instruction though content areas where scafolding strategies are implemented. ELL and SIFE students receive Native Language instruction. In addition to items in #3 above, ELL students are enrolled in online programs Rosetta Stone, ESL ReadSmart and SCANTRON for Literacy support. Students at different levels are provided with literacy and language support in both their native language (when possible) and English. Our plan for SIFE students is to closely monitor their attendance in coordination with the guidance counselor and the individual grade teams. The grade teams administer baseline exams in their respective departments and then create an academic plan based on the ability of the 2018-19 SCEP-FF 59  student. Our SIFE students are enrolled into our After-school and Saturday academy also. Our newcomers (less than 3 years) are teamed up with a student buddy whose English level is advanced in order to expedite the process of learning English. All newcomers are evaluated in grade teams to ascertain their strengths and weaknesses and to teach them accordingly. Our plan for Long-Term ELLs is to continue their process for English language development using Afterschool and Saturday academy for both enrichment and regents requirements. We have after school writing programs and verbal SAT prep for student achievement. Lastly, all of our AIS initiatives are open to the entire school (with special targeting to this subgroup of ELLs). In addition, Former ELLs are provided extended time on examinations for up to 2 years. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? We have over 100 student with disabilities in our school. Teacher Teams and ICT teachers address the needs and learning disabilities of our SWDs during common planning time. Student IEPs are shared via SESIS with our staff of SWDs. A special education teacher co-teaches core classes when required by a student's IEP. Furthermore, all our SWDs are in the least restricted environment as it relates to their IEP mandates. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? During daily inter/intra departmental common-planning periods, teachers create unit/lesson plans that require students to be actively involved in learning, ask them to analyze, synthesize, and evaluate information, and develop products and performances for real audiences and purposes, authentic assessments. ENL instruction, using ENL strategies and methodologies, is aligned to the ELA Common Core/NYS Standards and Regents tasks. Discrete skills and concepts are taught explicitly and rubrics that stem from the standards and performance indicators are used as tools for assessment for all written assignments and oral presentations. Rubrics are supported with examples and anchors that illustrate the various levels of performance for students. A Balanced Literacy approach is used across the core curricula. All ninth grade students are scheduled for ninety-minute blocks for mathematics and ELA classes. The support teacher has a primary focus of increasing the reading, writing and document analysis skills necessary for students to pass regents exams and increase college readiness. Interventions for science includes a looping of the living environment teacher in which the 9th grade teacher moves to the 10th grade with the same students for continuity for regents exams. There are daily A.M , P.M. classes for both Science and Social Studies. In Science and Math, P.M. classes and Saturday classes are available in their native language. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. Students who have tested “proficient” on the NYSESLAT will be provided with 240 minutes of ELA with ENL infused support mechanisms in place to facilitate the transition into regular ELA classes. State law still entitles these students to ENL services for one additional year. Additionally, tutorials and Saturday Academy provide Regents preparation and further language acquisition. Regents Examination preparation takes place during the instructional day and during Saturday Academy. Students are paired with instructional staff to facilitate their understanding and development in any given area. Students requiring more than four years to complete high school are given instructional support on Saturdays as well as daily tutorial assistance. These students are invited to attend the Saturday Academy as a way to receive additional language and instructional support. Professional Development strategies including Quality Teaching for English Learners (QTEL) are utilized throughout the ESL courses to ensure student success. Additionally, each grade level has class advisors which assist with the transition from one grade to another. Our entire school consists of ELLs. Therefore, progress is reported on both NYS Accountability and NYC Progress Report Cards. Credit accumulation and Regents pass rates are equal or greater than similar schools on the NYC Progress Report. The English Language Regents is the most challenging exam for our students. The English language acquisition is measure by the NYSESLAT. The latest NYSELAT shows that 25% of our students gained at least one proficiency level and 7% tested Proficient. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? NONE 2018-19 SCEP-FF 60  10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? N/A 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. Interactive Smart Boards, Laptops Computers, dual-language dictionaries, Native Language content are textbooks, and literacy libraries. All teachers have textbooks, regents review materials and classroom libraries to help increase literacy. Teachers have access to discovery education to supplement lessons, as well as the wizard test maker which helps to assess regents readiness. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. Native language development is a paramount concern for students labeled as SIFE; when possible, these students are programmed for 240 minutes of weekly instruction in their native language in order to facilitate skill development. Much of this curriculum is aligned with the ENL and ELA classes in order to ensure comprehension, vocabulary acquisition, and foundational writing skills. Currently, there are 10 Spanish native language instructors on faculty. Additionally, there are 2 ENL instructors on faculty. Native language instruction is critical in the overall development of students’ second language skills. The needs of students in English only classes are addressed on a case-by-case basis. Students are encouraged to utilize first language skills to further their development and understanding in their second language. Our native language instruction is done primarily in our P.M. and A.M. schools. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Required services and support correspond to ELLs' ages and grade levels by assessing students needs in grade teams and placing the students into corresponding A.M and P.M classes based on ability. For example, we may have an eleventh grader writing at an 8th or 9th grade level, which would prompt teachers to place the student in a lower level after school class in order to acquire the necessary skills. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. For new students to our school who were "list-noticed" to us, we have an orientation prior to the school year where materials are distributed, presentations from staff are made, and a Question-and-Answer forum is provided. However, more than half our new students come "over-the-counter" as newly arrived students to the country during the months of September and October. A preliminary conference is held with the student, the family, and a welcome team of staff. Additionally, we have a peer-to-peer mentoring program for new students, where upper level and successful students mentor new students during their first year. Beginning the summer of 2017 we provide a "Transition-to-High School" program to our new students. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? Native language development is a paramount concern for students labeled as SIFE; when possible, these students are programmed for 240 minutes of weekly instruction in their native language in order to facilitate skill development. Much of this curriculum is aligned with the ENL and ELA classes in order to ensure comprehension, vocabulary acquisition, and foundational writing skills. Currently, there are 10 Spanish native language instructors on faculty. Additionally, there are 2 ESL instructors on faculty. Native language instruction is critical in the overall development of students’ second language skills. The needs of students in English only classes are addressed on a case-by-case basis. Students are encouraged to utilize first language skills to further their development and understanding in their second language. Our native language instruction is done primarily in our P.M. and A.M. schools. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). As of now, we offer French, but we are working to incorporate additional languages into our curriculum. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? French, Conversational English 2018-19 SCEP-FF 61  18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? All staff, including Assistant Principal, Social Worker, Guidance counselor, teachers, Special Education teachers, and paraprofessionals have a weekly meeting. Instructional strategy is a component of every weekly PD meetings. The minimal amount of time allocated to presenting ENL strategies at these meetings is 20 minutes resulting in a minimum of approximately 11.5 hours annually for all teachers. Teachers share instructional strategies at these meetings, with specific detail and attention paid to our ENL learners. We have outside people attend meetings periodically in an attempt to provide new insights. One person from each department will attend an outside PD and turn-key train the members of the respective department. The school psychologist and speech teacher supports 2 campus schools and receive their required professional development from the Borough Center. Teachers, particularly in 9th grade, are trained to assist ELLs as they transition from one school level to another by our in-house weekly PD meetings. Our ENL teachers provide specific strategies to the rest of the staff in order to create the smoothest transition possible for ELLs as they transition from one school level to the next. During daily inter/intra departmental common-planning periods, teachers, guidance counselor and social worker, create unit/lesson plans that require students to be actively involved in learning, ask them to analyze, synthesize, and evaluate information, and develop products and performances for real audiences and purposes, authentic assessments. ENL instruction, using ENL strategies and methodologies, is aligned to the ELA Performance Standards and Regents tasks. Discrete skills and concepts are taught explicitly and rubrics that stem from the standards and performance indicators are used as tools for assessment for all written assignments and oral presentations. Rubrics are supported with examples and anchors that illustrate the various levels of performance for students. A Balanced Literacy approach is used across the core curricula. All ninth grade students are scheduled for ninety-minute blocks for mathematics and ELA classes. Lastly, for the past three years the inter/intra departmental team meeting have been discussing and updating curriculum to incorporate the Common Core shifts. The minimum hours required for ELL training is easily met in our weekly PD meetings. Teachers share research based strategies on the most effective ELL instruction. Records of these meetings are kept by the Principal and Lead Teacher (as she creates the weekly agenda). Monthly Professional development offered by the Borough Support Center is attended by the guidance counselor, social worker, and teachers. Topics include ELL strategies and supports, ELL transition strategies and supports, ELL-SWD strategies and supports, and how to incorporate the Common Core into instruction. In addition, the Borough Support Center periodically will come to the school and provide targeted professional development for our ELLs , SWD, Guidance, and Common Core. Records of all Professional Development are kept in a binder by the Principal in her office. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 62  Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? We have 2 ELL teachers. They are included in full staff professional development, encouraged to observe other teachers and attend outside professional development provided by the Borough Field Support Center. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. All staff, including Assistant Principal, Social Worker, Guidance counselor, teachers, Special Education teachers, and paraprofessionals has a weekly 35 minute meeting every Monday morning for approximately 35 weeks. This is a per session event in which all staff members attend. Instructional strategy is a component of every weekly PD meetings. The minimal amount of time allocated to presenting ESL strategies at these meetings is 20 minutes resulting in a minimum of approximately 11.5 hours annually for all teachers. Teachers share instructional strategies at these meetings, with specific detail and attention paid to our ESL learners. We have outside people attend meetings from periodically in an attempt to provide new insights. One person from each department will attend an outside PD and turn-key train the members of the respective department. Teachers, particularly in 9th grade, are trained to assist ELLs as they transition from one school level to another by our in-house weekly PD meetings. Our ESL teachers provide specific strategies to the rest of the staff in order to create the smoothest transition possible for ELLs as they transition from one school level to the next. During daily inter/intra departmental common-planning periods, teachers, guidance counselor and social worker, create unit/lesson plans that require students to be actively involved in learning, ask them to analyze, synthesize, and evaluate information, and develop products and performances for real audiences and purposes, authentic assessments. ESL instruction, using ESL strategies and methodologies, is aligned to the ELA Performance Standards and Regents tasks. Discrete skills and concepts are taught explicitly and rubrics that stem from the standards and performance indicators are used as tools for assessment for all written assignments and oral presentations. Rubrics are supported with examples and anchors that illustrate the various levels of performance for students. A Balanced Literacy approach is used across the core curricula. All ninth grade students are scheduled for ninety-minute blocks for mathematics and ELA classes. Lastly, for the past three years the inter/intra departmental team meeting have been discussing and updating curriculum to incorporate the Common Core shifts. The minimum of 7.5 hours of ELL training is easily met in our weekly PD meetings. Teachers share research based strategies on the most effective ELL instruction. Records of these meetings are kept by the Principal as he creates the weekly agenda. Monthly Professional development offered by the Borough Support Center is attended by the guidance counselor, social worker, and teachers. Topics include ELL strategies and supports, ELL transition strategies and supports, ELL-SWD strategies and supports, and how to incorporate the Common Core into instruction. In addition, the Borough Center periodically will come to the school and provide targeted professional development for our ELLs , SWD, Guidance, and Common Core. Records of all Professional Development are kept in a binder by the Principal in her office. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? 2018-19 SCEP-FF 63  The ESL teachers calls and meet with ELLs and parents on an as-needed basis. This occurs at least every marking period. Additionally, every student has an advisor who contacts the parent every 3 weeks to provide an update regarding their child's progress toward graduation. Counselors reach out 1 time per month as well regarding social-emotional supports. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. There are 10 PTA meetings during which ELLs' parents are invited as well. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. n/a 2018-19 SCEP-FF 64 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Melanie Williams, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 65  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: Mott Haven Village Preparatory School DBN: 07X473 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Melanie S Williams Title Principal Tameika Solomon Assistant Principal Anita Burgos Parent Coordinator Lashonda Gardenhire ENL/Bilingual Teacher Ana Berroa Parent Samantha Foti/English Teacher/Subject Area Michele Obryan/Special Ed Teacher/Subject Area Neil Ramer Anita Bushi Coach Coach Cynthia Leon School Counselor Carron Staple n/a n/a n/a n/a Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Glenn Olga Other 11/17/16 Other n/a Other n/a Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 11/17/16 11/17/16 11/17/16 11/17/16 11/17/16 11/17/16 11/17/16 11/17/16 11/17/16 11/17/16 11/17/16 Anita Bushi n/a n/a n/a 2018-19 SCEP-FF 66  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 07X473 School Name: Mott Haven Preparatory High School Superintendent: Michael Alcoff The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Anita Burgos Parent Coordinator Yes Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. We determined the preferred language through the RCPL report, completed Blue Cards, Parent Surveys, student interviews and social worker phone calls. Although approximately 20% of our student population are still considered ELLs, our surveys indicate that most homes prefer Spanish communication. As such, additional measures must be taken to communicate with parents. Kinvolved automatically translates messages to preferred language. In addition to data from surveys, we utilize Emergency Contact Sheets and ATS Reports listing home languages as well as preferred spoken languages. We have full translation available for our students and all letters to our families are written in English and the other native languages. Our staff discusses the language barriers that exist in our weekly professional development meetings. Staff members also use Rosetta Stone to build familiarity and fluency in Spanish. We also leverage the Translation Unit if/when necessary. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 67  2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral English Spanish Arabic Afrikaans 332 236 2 1 58.04 41.26 .35 .17 324 241 3 1 56.74 42.21 .53 .18 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. N/A Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? - Freshman Orientation Flyer and corresponding documentation, which includes registration and all other relative information. - School directory - Parent-Teacher Conference flyers, Families - June and September - Family Night/Curriculum Night - September Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. - Jupiter Grades automatically translates correspondence into parents' preferred language. - Additionally, the Translation Unit and Parent Coordinator are used to assist with face-to-face meetings. - We also use Kinvolved which automatically translates messages to parents. - Staff are using Rosetta Stone to build familiarity and fluency in preferred languages (especially Spanish). 2018-19 SCEP-FF 68  - monthly school calendar and special events calendar - September, November, March, May - September - Senior student updates - PTA Meeting Agendas, minutes - Montefiore Campus Medical Clinic provides translated literature to families. - Monthly (mailed at the end of the previous month) - approximately every 6 weeks (aligned with marking periods) - Monthly - As needed n/a n/a n/a * n/a n/a n/a * n/a n/a n/A * 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide interpretation service(s)? - Parent-Teacher Conferences (including Family Night) - September, November, March and May - Parent-Teacher Association meetings - Monthly - School Leadership Team Meetings, For oral interpretation, the Translation Unit, Parent Coordinator, Guidance Counselor and staff members are used to assist with face-to-face meetings. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 69  - Tuesday Family Engagement Time, - Monthly - College and Career Readiness Events, - Parent Workshops - Student Progress Report Meetings - Weekly (every Tuesday after-school) - At least twice per year as coordinated with PC - At least 5 per year as coordinated with PC - At least every 3 weeks (as needed for struggling students) - One-to-one family meetings (i.e. SpEd meeting) - At least once per year in compliance with SpEd and/or ENL regulations N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. In the event of a school emergency, Jupiter Grades and Kinvolved translates all correspondence to parents' preferred language which includes Spanish, French, Suninku, Fulani, Arabic, etc. For oral interpretation, the Translation Unit, Parent Coordinator and/or Guidance Counselor is used to assist in face-to-face meetings with parents... Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Professional Development Sessions on Monday for Full Staff includes best practices, user friendly handouts of DOE's language access resources. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services 2018-19 SCEP-FF 70  Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) A copy of the Bill of Parent Rights and Responsibilities, which includes their rights regarding translation and interpretation services is disseminated to each family enrolled in our school via back-packing mail, and parent meetings. A copy of this bill is posted in the Parent Association's Office as well as all administrative and Guidance Offices. Of the parents who do not respond to our requests, phone calls are made by the social worker and guidance counselor for follow up until contact is made between the school and the parents. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? The NYC Learning Environment Survey is used as our primary gathering feedback tool. Survey made available to all parents; parents assess their child's school, teachers, administrators, support staff and including whether or not the school is communicating with the parent in their native language. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 71 
