 12X478 School Name: THE CINEMA SCHOOL Principal: KEISHA WARNER   Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC)   Section 1: School Information Page School Information School Name: The Cinema School 321200011478 BEDS Code: School Number (DBN): 12x478 Grades Served: School Address: 9, 10, 11, 12 1551 East 172 Street, Bronx, NY 10472 718-620-2560 718-620-2561 Phone Number: Fax: Email Address: abeckman@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Alison Beckman Keisha Warner-LoSasso Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: William Linville Lana Stor Alison Beckman Sylvie Guillen Wendy Lopez Nicholas Mack N/A Geographical District: 12 Superintendent’s Office Address: District Information Michael Alcoff Superintendent: 2 MetrotechPlaza, 3rd Floor, Suite 3900, Brooklyn, NY 11201 malcoff@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718-935-3074 Phone Number: FSC: Bronx 718-935-3948 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) Jose Ruiz Executive Director:   Executive Director’s Office Address: 1 Fordham Plaza, Bronx, NY 10458 Jruiz2@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 718-828-7776 Phone Number: 718-510-6245 Fax:   Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Keisha Warner-LoSasso William Linville Lana Stor N/A Kisha Meyers Nicholas Mack Wendy Lopez Jacob Stebel Alison Beckman Aida Cruz Sylvie Guillen Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) UFT Member Assistant Principal Parent Parent Member/ Parent   Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/   Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with   the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement   Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Mission Section 4: CEP Overview The Cinema School is a select admission academic high school that prepares students for college through a liberal arts education grounded in filmmaking. Our curriculum develops strong conceptual thinkers and the skills they need to accomplish great things .   Vision Students of The Cinema School will be skilled at conceptual thinking which will allow them to develop academic & professional behaviors that will allow them to accomplish great things in the post-secondary setting and beyond. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. The Liberal Arts Tradition The liberal arts tradition emphasizes a broadening of the mind. It centers learning on having wonderful ideas, self-actualization and empowerment. This tradition also emphasizes the importance of being well-rounded, of being exposed to many ideas and being able to engage in critical discussion and action. The Cinema School offers a rigorous college preparatory curriculum with four-year sequences in Math, Science, Social Studies, English and Film. All Cinema School students take the courses they need to be eligible for an Advanced regents diploma in preparation for the post-secondary academic setting. Learning Through the Lens of the Filmmaker We believe that filmmaking develops a distinct way of seeing and understanding the world and that a set of intellectual dispositions, or habits of mind, enable thoughtful and intelligent action. These four dispositions inform the questions we ask and frame the way we approach problems. 1. Storytelling—Stories help us understand ourselves, our world and our history. The creation of stories is a way of interpreting, analyzing, ordering and questioning ideas. 2. Critical Literacies—Critical literacy is not just reading the word, but reading the world. It refers to the ability to ask why things are as they are and whose interests they serve. 3. Visual Thinking—Visual thinking refers to the capacity to create and read visual material with depth and insight. 4. Collaboration—Effective teams consist of individuals who find common ground to achieve a worthy goal. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. Our school consists of General Education students, English Language Learners and Students with Disabilities. There are no further distinctions among our school community. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. 0  Our school is working on how to push rigor across all departments. In the spring of 2014 a school-wide definition of rigor was established. This common language is how we discuss ways to challenge our students cognitively. Our students have a history of academic success (passing all classes, very good or excellent attendance and punctuality) but we have noticed that college readiness indicators are in need of improvement. We are examining how to design rigorous instruction. In the fall of 2014, teachers received a copy of The Understanding by Design Guide to Creating High-Quality Units to support the teachers in unit planning, lesson planning and planning rigorous activities within the units and lesson plans. Professional development is guided by research-based resources. The following books are the school’s professional development resources as we continue to deepen the work of boosting student achievement in our department teams: The Core Six: Essential Strategies for Achieving Excellence with the Common Core, Focus: Elevating the Essentials to Radically Improve Student Learning and Grading Smarter Not Harder: Assessment Strategies That Motivate and Help Them Learn. 1  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 12X478 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 09,10,11,12 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 290 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 2 2 7 7 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 40 26 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 86.0% % Attendance Rate 82.4% % Reduced Lunch 6.2% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 1.4% 71.4% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 3.1% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 5.25 0% 10% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation 100% 87% 86.8% 4.4% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A YES N/A N/A YES Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A YES N/A N/A YES Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A YES N/A N/A YES No N/A 30 30 1 88.4% 3.4% 20.0% 21.7% 2.1% 1.7% 4 24% 3.8 N/A N/A 100% 98% 97.9% 26% N/A No No N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A YSH N/A N/A N/A N/A YES 2  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Needs:  Consistency in rigorous activity during the student activity/practice portion of a lesson  Making student thinking visible so that the teacher an ascertain where understanding breaks down Strengths:  All teachers are members of a department team; department leaders articulated a professional development plan at the beginning of the school year toward the aforementioned areas of need.  Department teams serve to support teachers in the academic content as well as provide professional development within that content area Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, the Math department will use the department rubric to improve the articulation of students' approach to multi-step, real-world problems as measured by a 5% increase in scores of 75 or higher on the Regents. 3  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Academic Department Meetings will implement student work protocols to assess where meaning breaks down for students. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? 9/5/18 to 6/14/19 Department Leaders and the principal Lowest Third and all SWDs and ELLs that are not in the lowest third After school supplemental instruction (tutoring) and Saturday School prior to Regents administration Struggling Students Parent Engagement Workshops will be geared toward supporting parents to be active participants in their children's math education. Parents of students in Algebra Algebra tutoring intensive 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Students identified from September diagnostic 9/5/18 to 6/14/19 9/5/18 to 6/14/19 9/5/18 to 1/31/19 Algebra teacher Admin & Math Department Algebra teacher How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Parents will receive curriculum letter from the Algebra teacher that explains the topics that will be covered throughout the year. Parents will also receive a Pupil Path account that will give them up-to-date information about their child's progress. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. ● After-school tutoring ● Textbooks that have been vetted by members of departments Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A 4  C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind X Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Midpoint: February 2019 review of progress toward goal in a Department Leader meeting. During this meeting a list of what has been accomplished and what remains to be completed will be made. Timeframes will be attached to the outstanding actionable steps. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) Regents results. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 5  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? Needs:  Programs and events that encourage student-to-teacher and teacher-to-student bonding  Programs that inspire students to achieve their highest academic potential Strengths:   School culture events such as staff vs student basketball, staff vs student quiz bowls, launching a chapter of The National Honor Society, School-wide assemblies to celebrate attendance, academic achievement and improvement Students create SMART goals to draw a link between the teacher's support of that student and the progress the student makes as a result of that support.  Annual screenings of students' filmmaking endeavors Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 100% of Cinema School teachers will have participated in a collaborative planning for school culture events. 6  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Maintain our chapter of the National Honor Society Attendance Marathon Parent Engagement workshops that communicate where the students should go and what the students should do to receive academic or social-emotional assistance Student Advisory Council 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? 9/5/18 to 6/14/19 NHS Advsirs 9/5/18 to 6/14/19 Attendance Committee 9/5/18 to 6/14/19 Parent Coordinator 9/5/18 to 6/14/19 Principal High Academic Ranked Students Chronic Absentees or Chronic tardies Parents of students in need of social-emotional or academic support to boost academics Two student representatives from each grade How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. The website will be updated on a regular basis to provide redundant communication that is given to the students to ensure the parents have access to what is happening in our school community. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. ● Per Session ● Professional Development 7  ● Maximizing Parent Engagement time Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Midpoint: By February, 2019 teachers will review attendance, punctuality and progress toward graduation (credits & Regents) as data to assess how the supportive environment is supporting our struggling students. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. The instrument of measure will be the student transcript as ultimately, the goal is to ensure the student remains on track for graduating within four years. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 8  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Needs: ● Opportunities to collaborate where student achievement is the focal point of discussion that result in the creation action plans. Strengths: ● Department Leaders create a professional development plan for the year. ● Collaboration on curriculum that will improve college readiness skills (QR) ● In need of support to utilize data from the PSAT results to improve our college readiness (QR) Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By the June 2019 a minimum of 100% of the teaching staff will implement professional development (attended, planned or facilitated) that supports rigorous instruction. as evidenced by observations and student work. 9  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Discussion Lab Analysis of common lagging skills as indicated by the Assessment Driven Instruction protocol Communication to parents to explain our college readiness program which includes the trajectory of the courses students are taking as well as how to read the results of the PSAT All academic departments 9/5/18 to 6/14/19 Long-term strugglers 10 th and 11 th grade families 9/5/18 to 6/14/19 9/5/18 to 6/14/19 Model Teacher Teachers of Academic Content Guidance Counselors Gap analysis of curriculum in order to implement instructional change Students in core classes 9/5/18 to 6/14/19 Department Leaders 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Teacher will keep a record of key assignments that show how the students are progressing with respect to the key common lagging skill area indicated by the September baseline assessment. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. School-wide messaging, school web page, Parent Coordinator communications, SAT preparation courses Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 0  Midpoint: April 2019 review student work product to assess student progress. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Assessment Driven Instruction disaggregated data as well as school-wide report on Danieslon component 3c which focuses on rigor. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 1  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Needs: ● Awareness of the various leadership decisions that support teachers and their access to the curriculum, professional development or coaching. Strengths: ● Delegation of Leadership by establishing department leaders as a professional duty ● Meeting with department leaders for input and implementation of professional development Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, at least 75% of the teaching staff will have an overall Measures of Teacher Practice (MOTP) score of 2.75 or above in components 3b and 3cDanielson rubric. 2  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Discussion Lab sessions All teachers 9/5/18 to Model Teacher 6/14/19 Department-based Inquiry work All teachers 9/5/18 to Administration 6/14/19 Peer-driven Inter-visitations All teachers 9/5/18 to Administration Scheduled peer intervisitations 3b – Parent and Family Engagement 5/30/19 9/5/18 to 5/30/19 Teachers Teachers who need support in 3b component of the Danielson rubric How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Parents will receive progress reports between marking periods via Pupil Path, with hard copies also being mailed home. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. SBO to prioritize departmental planning during professional periods and Discussion Lab facilitated by a Highly Effective teacher in Domain 3b. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other 3  Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Midpoint: February 2, 2019 review of Advance ratings to date to determine professional development needs. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Advance MOTP reports. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 4  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Needs: ● Parent participation in school-wide events such as college night, screenings, parent association meetings. ● Parental awareness of various school initiatives and programs and opportunities for students Strengths: ● Information now gets sent to families in various simultaneous ways: Email blasts, digital backpacks on the parent tab of the school website, school messenger missives and post card notices mailed home Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019 the majority of our parents will access information about their child's progress in school as evidenced by a minimum of 75% (of whom 100% represent the freshman class) who log into Pupil Path. 5  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Procedure for establishing effective communication to families that is multi-pronged: digital backpack via school website, email blast via Pupil Path, and telephone calls through School Messenger Spanish- speaking families 9/5/18 to 6/14/19 Parent Coordinator, Communications are always provided in English and Spanish to ensure that our families are aware of key dates and events 9/5/18 to 6/14/19 Families with Spanish as a home language Parent Coordinator This year we will host a focus group to get feedback from our Spanish speaking parents about how to make our school more inclusive of their needs. Spanish speaking homes 9/5/18 to 6/14/19 Parent Coordinator Parent Offerings will include College Night, FAFSA Night, Parental Support Groups All Families 9/5/18 to 6/14/19 Assistant Principal in charge of Guidance 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. N/A Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Parent Volunteers, FACE resources for parent engagement, college representatives, Pupil Path, School Messenger, School website Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other 6  Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Midpoint: February 2019. the Parent Coordinator will work with the technology coordinator to identfuy parents who have not yet logged into Pupil Path. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Pupil Path report with data on parent logins. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 7  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Small group tutoring After-school Individual Support Saturday School Classroom instruction During the course of the school day Small group tutoring After-school Individual Support Saturday School Classroom instruction During the course of the school day Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Marking period course failures Course credit deficits Regents examination failures Grade level graduation requirements IEP (if applicable) Mathematics Marking period course failures Course credit deficits Regents examination failures Grade level graduation requirements IEP (if applicable) Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) After-school tutoring and Saturday School for enhances academic achievement and Regents examination preparation Acellus online course for electronic credit completion Courses offered as “audit” opportunities for non-credit bearing Regents examination preparation After-school tutoring and Saturday School for enhances academic achievement and Regents examination preparation Acellus for electronic credit completion Courses offered as “audit” opportunities for non-credit bearing Regents examination preparation 8  Science Marking period course failures Course credit deficits Regents examination failures Grade level graduation requirements Laboratory hours IEP (if applicable) Social Studies Marking period course failures Course credit deficits Regents examination failures After-school tutoring and Saturday School for enhances academic achievement and Regents examination preparation Acellus for electronic credit completion Courses offered as “audit” opportunities for non-credit bearing Regents examination preparation After-school tutoring and Saturday School for enhances academic achievement and Regents examination preparation Grade level graduation requirements Accellus for electronic credit completion Courses offered as “audit” opportunities for non-credit bearing Regents examination preparation Programming modifications and adjustments based upon individual student needs Instructional goals to guide academic progress IEP (if applicable) Comprehensive review of report cards and academic transcripts Review of IEP Student self-assessment through Advisory school-wide comprehensive counseling program At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Small group tutoring After-school Individual Support Saturday School Classroom instruction During the course of the school day Small group tutoring After-school Individual Support Saturday School Classroom instruction During the course of the school day Instructional and administrative support Guidance counselor support Columbia University School of Social work intern support (four interns in total) Advisory periods Mandated counseling (if applicable) Individual and group counseling; psycho educational classroom push-in Monthly guidance presentations 9  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) There are currently 25 students who have the designation Student in Temporary Housing as per the McKinney-Vento Act residency questionnaire. 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. Financial assistance with resources to support academic needs such as school supplies and college application fees. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 0  N/A 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. N/A 1  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. All teachers of The Cinema School are highly qualified. To aid in retention, the mission, vision and school values are the focal points of the interview process. Teachers are provided with built-in supports which are collaborative teacher teams on a department and grade level as the main conduit for professional development. Additional professional development is lead by the Staff Development Committee and have been previously supported by ISA coach (math) and educational consultants from Learner Centered Initiatives. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). The culture of the school is that all pedagogues participate in the inquiry process with a process that we call Assessment Driven Instruction (ADI). ADI is an inquiry cycle in which a the students' key lagging Common Core aligned skill is being regularly assessed so that teachers can respond with instructional supports. The work of the departmental team is to build a four-year trajectory so that skills are increasing in rigor from grade 9 to 12. The ADI cycle is unique to each teacher thus it is differentiated professional development. In addition, all teachers sit on a grade team and a departmental team as this structure provides the teachers with ample time to collaborate. The work of the grade team is to promote social-emotional growth in all students through instructional strategies. By relying on researched positive behavioral intervention supports (PBIS), teachers will come away with a deeper understanding of what their students need to succeed academically. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. 2  N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). N/A 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. A MOSL committee was formed in the later summer to discuss range of assessment options. Teachers participated in a discussion among their peers within the same discipline to determine the most appropriate assessment. The feedback was then shared with the MOSL committee. Within department teams, teachers reviewed the results of the assessment and adjusted instruction to support the areas of weakness revealed by the baseline assessment. Additionally, Teachers participate in Assessment Driven Instruction which takes authentic student data from major assessments to track growth in indicated areas of weakness. The teachers decide on the kind of diagnostic assessment to use and which subsequent benchmark assessments will be used to monitor the academic growth in their students. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are 3  Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) 255,777 2,048,343 x x consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Column B Verify with an (X) Section Reference(s) 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not 4  available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 5  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. The Cinema School, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. The Cinema School will support parents and families of Title I students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; 6  ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in 7  the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Every Student Succeeds Act. ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) School-Parent Compact (SPC) The Cinema School,n compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for 8  improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act. I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; 9  ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Every Student Succeeds Act.Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities 0  ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; 1  ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 2  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 12 School Name The Cinema School Borough Bronx School Number 478 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Keisha Warner-LoSasso Coach N/A ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Adel Ibrahim Teacher/Subject Area N/A Teacher/Subject Area N/A Related-Service Provider Jessica Marroquin Superintendent Paul Rotondo Assistant Principal Rani Pendharkar Coach N/A School Counselor Paulette Monforte Parent Aida Cruz Parent Coordinator Paulette Monforte Field Support Center Staff Member Socorro Diaz Other (Name and Title) N/A C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 0 1 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 305 3 Total number of ELLs 12 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 3.93%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 1 2 4 3 K Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 5 6 7 8 0 0 0 0 9 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? Teachers at The Cinema School use teacher created assessments at the beginning of the year to assess early literacy skills of our ELLs. This method is what all teachers participate in throughout a cycle that is called Assessment Driven Instruction which is an inquiry cycle that tracks the progress of the closing the gap in the students' lagging skill(s). 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? During the academic school year, teachers at The Cinema School present their assessment analysis (Disaggretated and Item Analysis) to the school staff. Teachers focus on Specific Criteria/Benchmark Skills/Core Standards to showcase where students have achieved goals at the proficiency level and where students struggled. This is done using an adapted Critical Friends protocol. 4  3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? We evaluate the success of our ENL program based on their ability for students to demonstrate movement on the trajectory of the NYSESLAT Performance Level Descriptions so that there is constant movement toward the Commanding designation. This success is assessed based on the Targets of Measurement. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? ENL teacher convenes with content teachers and ENL students to address ENL students' areas of difficulty. Interventions will be addressed by looking for entry points for UDL, scaffolding, and language supports based on the General Education teacher's unit plan. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] The school is implementing the RtI via our assessment driven instruction cycle of inquiry in which the teacher diagnonses students lagging skills, and makes an instructional plan, assesses throughout the year to adjust instruction accordingly. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. What is revealed by the data patterns across performance levels is that the students need constant support with access to literacy in order to support their ability to understand content across the four major disciplines. That is to say, building the students tier 2 word vocabulary as well as content specific vocabulary. The NYSESLAT and Regents scores are used to inform the ELL program. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? There will be in-house professional development where staff will be made aware of ELLs' academic stength and weaknesses. we also have the inquiry cycle that we call Assessment Driven Instruction that quantifies the progress students are making. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. All ELLs are scheduled in heterogenous cohorts on the same grade level. Integrated ENL services are delivered by Adel Ibrahim. According to the proficiency level, the students receive instruction that is a combination of stand-alone instruction and integrated ENL. b. TBE program. If applicable. N/A c. DL program. If applicable. N/A 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? 5  ENL instructional minutes are delivered as per the student's English Proficiency Level. Entering levels will receive 3 units of study per week totaling 540 minutes; Emerging students will receive 2 units per week totaling 360 minutes; Transitioning students will receive 1 unit of study per week totaling 180 minutes; Expanding students will receive 1 unit of study per week totaling 180 minutes. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. Core content is delivered in English. For the stand-alone, students are provided with language acquisition tools that can be used across the disciplines. The students have a copy of Getting Ready for NYSESLAT 9-12 which is a resource to help prepare them for the NYSESLAT. For the Integrated ENL, students are provided with content-specific vocabulary acquisition tools. Sheltered English is the method being used to ensure that the students have access to Common Core aligned content while supporting language acquisition. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? Students who are eligible to take the Spanish LAB will have the opportunity to do so in order to have their home language evaluated throughout the year. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status a. SIFES will receive support to bring them up to grade level. Content will be differentiated that the students can achieve the learning objectives.b. Newcomers will receive the mandated minutes of service from an ENL teacher as well as translated content in their home language as a reference tool. These students will take Regents examinations in their home language and will received testing accommodations. c. Developing students will receive support with differentiated texts and resources in English to reference in their content area classes. These students will receive testing accommodations.d. Long Term ELLs will receive continued support in acessing the English Language at their grade level and testing accommodations.e. Former ELLs up to two years of exiting ELL status will continue to receive services for an additional two years. These students will receive extended time for exams. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? The teachers use the ICT teaching models and universal design with respect to how they administer their curriculum. Graphic organizers such as (guided notes, venn diagrams, t-charts, outlines). The content, process and product as indicated in the curriculum are grade and age appropriate. The school ensures ELL-SWDs receive the services that pertain to their language proficiency level as well as the mandates of their IEP. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? We flexibly schedule the students to ensure that mandates of their IEPs are met. At each annual, there will be a review of the IEP services to ensure they are consistently progressing in a least restrictive environment and so that they are always integrated with their General Education peers. The criteria used to place ELL-SWDs in ICT is according to the reccommendation of the IEP team. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. 6  Word banks are made available so that domain specific language is provided. In Mathematics interventions are centered around translating mathematical language (decoding what the math problem is asking them to do and identify the sequence of steps needed to solve the math problem). In Science, student interventions are centered around cause and effect relationships and drawing conclusions. In Social Studies, student interventions are centered around chunking information from informational text and interpreting visuals (maps and political cartoons). In English, reading and writing interventions are centered around graphic organizers and looking at context clues. These interventions are geared to meet the linguistic demands of each content area across all four modalities. All targeted interventions will be conducted in the English Language and will include the following: small group instruction, ENL teacher push-ins, teacher & student SMART goals to ensure students are progressing toward mastery, after-school tutoring. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? Improvements that will be considered for the upcoming year is increasing the instructional capacity with respect to designing instruction that takes into account ELL-specific needs. There will be more emphasis on co-planning with the content teacher to enhance the access to content and language objectives. Additionally, there will be more professional development given to the staff to provide them with new and effective scaffolding techniques. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? There are no programs that we will discontinue. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. Students are afforded equal access in that they are not academically tracked, they are scheduled for classes of progressive rigor, they are never denied the opportunity to take higher level courses like AP classes and advanced maths and sciences. After-school supplemental services are provided within our academic tutoring structures. Our ELLs are represented in all of academic and recreational structures of the school. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. ELLs have access to SMART board in every classroom which allows them to see a visual representation of the teacher's instruction; English-Spanish dictionaries are made available and the Getting Ready for the NYSESLAT workbook is provided for the students. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? The home language is not used in our ENL program, however it supported in supplemental material such as graphic organizers and home language/English dictionaries; it also supported in linking cultural connections to the English content. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. Curriculum goes through a quality control process in which the administrators of the building ensure that the students are receiving instruction that is Common Core aligned as per the grade level. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? ELLs have access to SMART board in every classroom which allows them to see a visual representation of the teacher's instruction; English-Spanish dictionaries are made available and the Getting Ready for the NYSESLAT workbook is provided for the students. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). We invite all students to come in prior to the school's opening so that parents of new and returning students can pick up their programs and meet with the Parent Coordinator, Guidance Counselors and school administrators if there are any questions or concerns. 7  17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? French is offered to ELLs. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? N/A Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? Teachers will be made aware of the ELLs that they teach and they will be introduced to the AMAO tool to get a better academic profile of the student. Assistant principals, guidance counselors, paraprofessionals, school psychologists, teachers and secretaries will have ongoing professional develop to support the teacher in how to adress language acqusition issues for the duration of the school year. In-house professional development will be offered to the teachers of ELLs and will be facilited by ENL teacher Adel Ibrahim. He will model teaching strategies that are transferable across the content. For example, he will show teachers how to use TOMSs when planning instruction, connecting TOMS to the Performance Level Descriptors and in methods of ensuring our ELLs are progressing in how they engage with Common Core aligned activities. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. As our students transition from middle to high school, the students are supported in their organizational skills, note taking skills, annotating skills, and study habits. The parent coordinator reaches out to parents during the summer months to describe their child's academic program. 50% of the professional development hours will be devoted to learning about supporting ELLs. 15% of the professional development hours will be devoted to supports for ELLs of non ENL teachers; sometimes this will be incoporated into a PD session and other times the PD will be entirely devoted to ELL PD. Our ENL teacher will benefit from the 15% offered to non ENL teachers and he will also benefit from city-wide professional development and direct one-on-one PD with Assistant Principal Rani Pendharkar or Principal Keisha Warner. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? The school will host meetings during Other Professional duties time or at a time that is convenient for the parents to come in. There will be a designee to take attendance and record minutes of the meeting. There will also be someone present who can communicate with the parent in their home language. Records of the annual meetings will be kept on file. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. 8  ELL parent involvement will be ensured by communicating upcoming events and meetings in their home langugage. To help foster parent involvement, we will be hosting Spanish language events or events in which the information can be translated into Spanish. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. N/A 9 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Keisha Warner, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 0  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: The Cinema School School DBN: 12x478 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Title Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) Keisha Warner-LoSasso Principal Rani Pendharkar Assistant Principal Liann Gutierrez Parent Coordinator Adel Ibrahim/ENL ENL/Bilingual Teacher Aida Cruz Parent Jessica Marroquin/Special Ed Teacher/Subject Area Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach Peter Moore School Counselor Paul Rotondo Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Socorro Diaz Other Other Other 1  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 12x478 School Name: The Cinema School Superintendent: Michael Alcoff The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Adel Liann Ibrahim Gutierrez ENL Teacher Parent Coordinator No No Yes Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. Our school utilizes the Home Language Survey (HLIS) as the main resource in determining the written and oral language preference of our family communities. In order to ensure that we have the correct information regarding our community's language preference, our ENL Coordinator, who also serves as our LAC, ensures that the HLIS are completed in a timely fashion. In addition, Mr. Ibrahim monitors the following ATS reports: RCPL, RECF, RCON, RAPL, and RADL. Our Parent Coordinator, Ms. Gutierrez, ensures that every student in our school has a current Emergency Contact card which is also utilized as a resource for language preference purposes. Ms. Gutierrez also provided professional learning to staff in how to access the NYC DOE translation services and resources to parents. Additionally, our school utilizes PupilPath/ SKEDULA as a communication tool to faculty and parents/guardians. The student information in this system is extract from ATS and STARS. Finally, our Special Education team utilizes aforementioned resources and the students profile section in SESIS to make any language 2  accommodation to parents and student during the reviews and evaluation processes and development of documents. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral ALbanian Bambara French Fulani Hausa Mandinka English Senufo Slovak Spanish Twi Urdu Vietname Wolof 2 1 1 3 0 1 264 1 1 182 1 2 2 1 0.43 0.22 0.22 0.65 0 0.22 57.14 0.22 0.22 39.39 0.22 0.43 0.43 0.22 2 1 1 3 1 1 263 1 2 181 1 2 2 1 0.43 0.22 0.22 0.65 0.22 0.22 59.93 0.22 0.43 39.18 0.22 0.43 0.43 0.22 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. N/A Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? 1. Meeting Invitations: Parent-Teacher Conference, Curriculum Monthly Families Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. In-house translation by bilingual staff members, NYCDOE Translation Services 3  Night, PA Meeting, College Night, June Awards Night and Screening 2. Notice of IEP Meetings, IEPs, and PWNs Year round 3. Newsletters Monthly SESIS, NYCDOE Translation Services In-house translation by bilingual staff members, NYCDOE Translation Services 4. Mandated forms and Opt Out Letters Year round as needed NYC DOE website 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide interpretation service(s)? Curriculum Night/ Parent Teacher Conferences As per DOE Calendar, three times a year IEP Meeting Year round Parent Association Monthly College Night Twice a year Bilingual staff members will serve as translators as needed. In addition, staff will utilize the NYC DOE over-the-phone interpretation services. Staff will utilize the NYC DOE over-the-phone interpretation services. Staff will utilize the NYC DOE over-the-phone interpretation services. Bilingual staff members will serve as translators as needed. In addition, staff will utilize the NYC DOE over-the-phone interpretation services. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. Our school utilizes School Messenger and PupilPath email and text services to notify parents about emergency situations. Both services offer a Spanish translation option. In addition, parents can choose in which language they would like to hear the message. Furthermore, considering the fact that our school consists of 70% Spanish speaking population, we have developed a database of templates consisting of emergency messages in Spanish to be sent to 4  parents as needed. We also have French, Arabic, Portuguese, and Spanish speaking bilingual staff members who will translate the messages to be delivered as needed. Finally, our school will contact the NYC DOE Translation Services department for any further assistance. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Professional learning on Translation services and Chancellor's regulation A-663 were provided to staff during Open School day. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) Parents who need language assistance will receive a Bill of Parent Rights and Responsibilities in their home language. We will post a of all the available for translation in a prominent location. The Safety Plan will contain procedures for ensuring that parents in need of language access services are not prevented from reaching the school’s administrative offices solely due to language barriers. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? We will survey parents to see if they are satisfied with the quality and availability of our communications. 5 
