2018-19 SCHOOL COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (SCEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 12X480 School Name: BRONX REGIONAL HIGH SCHOOL Principal: COLIN THOMAS 2018-19 SCEP-P 1  School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) Section 4: SCEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Expanded Learning Time (ELT) Section 7: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 8: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 9: Title I Program Information Section 10: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 SCEP-P 2  School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information Bronx Regional High School 12X480 321200011480 10 - 12 School Number (DBN): 1010 Reverend James A. Polite Avenue, Bronx, NY 10459 (718) 991-2020 (718) 617-0257 Phone Number: Colin Thomas Fax: cthomas@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Email Address: Colin Thomas Youssef Elhathat TBD Colin Thomas TBD Xena Melendez and Rashell Filpo Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: District Information Geographical District: 12 Paul Rotondo Superintendent: 198 Forsyth Street, New York, NY 10002 Superintendent’s Office Address: Protond@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 646-654-1261 Phone Number: Fax: FSC: Bronx Field Support Center (FSC) Executive Director: Jose Ruiz 2018-19 SCEP-P 3  Executive Director’s Office Address: One Fordham Plaza, Bronx, NY 10458 JRUIZ2@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 718-828-7776 Phone Number: 718-828-6280 Fax: 2018-19 SCEP-P 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the SCEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Colin Thomas Youseff Elhathat TBD Xena Melendez Rashell Filpo Ramon Rosado Celeste Ruiz Yngris Rosario *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/Parent 2018-19 SCEP-P 5  Name Erica Morel Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ 2018-19 SCEP-P 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the School Comprehensive Educational Plan The School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) is a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. The process of developing and implementing the SCEP is aligned to the Framework for Great Schools. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding SCEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department has established programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students supports to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and SCEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint for continuous improvement that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to increase student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five (5) goals and action plans that align with 2018-19 SCEP-P 7  the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. Accountability Tools and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is informed by the New York State Education Department’s (NYSED) Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) Tenets, the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Rubric, School Quality Guide and other quantitative and qualitative data tools. NYSED’s Six DTSDE Tenets To strengthen the existing system, the NYSED has developed a tool that captures the best practices from each of the current tools called the Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness. This new tool encompasses multiple instruments such as interviews, classroom observations and surveys. The protocol will begin with a clear and cogent statement of the optimal conditions of an effective school and the instruments comprising the protocol will measure how close or far away a particular school is to the optimal conditions identified. Once reviewed, the school and district will create a strategic plan to address the areas in need of improvement. All current Priority and Focus Schools and Focus Districts must use the tool; districts that are required to submit District Comprehensive Improvement Plans and Comprehensive Educational Plans also will use the tool. The DTSDE protocol includes a rubric, which identifies clear and coherent expectations of the optimal conditions of an effective school and school district across the following six tenets:  Tenet 1: District Leadership and Capacity  Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions  Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support  Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions  Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health, and  Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The 2017-18 Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: 2018-19 SCEP-P 8  Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) I. II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Structures for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the SCEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the SCEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. Next Steps for SCEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: In Part 1A of the Section 5: Needs Assessment indicate the Statement of Practice (SOP) from the DTSDE Tenets that will be addressed in the action plan. Schools that received an Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) School Review should use the recommendations from the review to select their SOPs. Schools that did not undergo an IIT review should select SOPs informed by the major findings/recommendations from your most recent Quality Review (QR) or Central-led Review (CLR), and other qualitative and quantitative data.  Step 4: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you 2018-19 SCEP-P 9  monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 5: Build consensus around activities, strategies and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 6: Step 6: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 7: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 2018-19 SCEP-P 10 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Section 4: SCEP Overview This approach is in keeping with our school mission: Our learning community is student-centered with a focus on assisting young adults in achieving their college and career goals, by developing multiple intelligences and empowering them as they become responsible citizens in a global community. Teachers engage students in learning, utilizing the latest in educational and creative technologies. We encourage our students to think independently, be supportive of their peers, and continue to move towards their professional and educational goals as they pursue their dreams. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. We know the scope of our work is broad and our time with our students is limited. This is why we collaborate with partners to provide the students with the support they need to graduate. We have a new CBO partner- East Side House Settlement and they will implement our Learning To Work program. They will also take a lead role in helping to improve school attendance. In addition, we have long term relationships with: • Hunter College School of Social Work and Montefiore Clinic (school based) allow both the medical and social/emotional needs of our students to be met. The campus has two LYFE Centers, which allows young parents to have their children in school with them during the day. The centers accommodate between 30-40 babies and at least 20-30 additional students are parents or are with child. One of our secondary goals is to broaden the horizons for our students. Each year we engage our students in activities that are designed to change their outlook. Our Knowledge for College Day, College Application Week, Health Fair, incentive trips, and college tours to all six New York City community colleges expose and prepare students for options and life after high school. Our administrative team, we make sure to align our goals with the ones identified by the Chancellor and our Superintendent. As a result, the framework for great schools is a tool we use as we think about what our students, parent and teachers need to know and do to get better. We encourage students to take classes after school. The extended day program allows our students to acquire additional credit using a range of programs at the close of the official day. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. Bronx Regional High School is a Transfer Alternative School for students who have previously attended a New York City High School. The demographics of our students is as follows: 63% Latino and 36% American/African/ Caribbean. We have 250 students on register and 63% are female. Unfortunately, the majority of our students are considered to be economically disadvantaged and qualify for free school lunch. We have a small special needs and ELL population; as a result, we differentiate our instruction in all departments to meet the diverse needs of all our students. 2018-19 SCEP-P 11  Students apply to our school because they are overage for grade and are under-credited. The majority of our students need to pass at least two Regents examinations. This need influences how we support students academically so we make sure to provide additional support to students that have earned the required class credit but still need to pass state tests. Our circular 6 offerings allow all students (ENLs, SWD and general education) to benefit from small group sessions that allow teachers to determine the next steps to help students to properly prepare for Regents examinations. We are a Title 1 school and use the School-Wide Program to help address the assorted academic gaps presented by our students. Our Regents-focused core academic curricula are designed to help meet students where they are academically. The Common Core Standards are fully integrated into all departments and are used to guide the development of our content driven curricula. Our teachers meet several times per week to collaborate. These sessions allows us to look at student work and to share ideas about ways to best support our students. The majority of our teaching staff use their professional period to enhance curricula; we map curricula, aligning our work to the Common Core and continue to develop a deeper understanding of the Danielson Framework. To help our students we share best practices, use intervisitations, and believe in formal and informal mentoring. Our ability to communicate with teachers from other departments is a strength and we use our ongoing professional development sessions to learn more about how to best reach our students. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. 2018-19 SCEP-P 12  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 12X480 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 09,10,11,12 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 230 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient N/A N/A 5 3 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 46 39 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 86.0% % Attendance Rate 84.8% % Reduced Lunch 10.4% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.0% 61.3% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 2.6% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 20.09 0% 8% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation 49% 22% 7.7% 0.0% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No No Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District Yes Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A YES N/A N/A NO Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A YES N/A N/A NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A NO N/A N/A NO Yes N/A 6 5 54.9% 1.3% 18.7% 34.3% 1.7% 0.0% 2 8% 7.5 N/A N/A 48% 28% 29.6% 1% N/A No No N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A NO YES N/A N/A N/A NO NO N/A N/A N/A NO 2018-19 SCEP-P 13  2018-19 SCEP-P 14  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 3 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 3.2 The school leader ensures and supports the quality implementation of a systematic plan of rigorous and coherent curricula appropriately aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS) that is monitored and adapted to meet the needs of students. Teachers develop and ensure that unit and lesson plans used include data-driven instruction (DDI) protocols that are appropriately aligned to the CCLS and NYS content standards and address student achievement needs. The school leader and teachers have developed a comprehensive plan for teachers to partner within and across all grades and subjects to create interdisciplinary curricula targeting the arts, technology, and other enrichment opportunities. Teachers implement a comprehensive system for using formative and summative assessments for strategic short and long-range curriculum planning that involves student reflection, tracking of, and ownership of learning. 3.3 3.4 3.5 SOP(s) Addressed X Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. As per our most recent Quality Review, the schools curricula is structure to ensure that college and career readiness skills are promoted for all students, the school has adopted the workshop model for all content areas. The structure provides opportunities for teachers to model a skill or strategy, time for students to practice with teacher guidance and then engage in independent practice. As most students in this transfer school are working on accumulation of credits and Regents exam preparation in order to meet graduation requirements, many of the units are based on test preparation. The workshop structure in lesson plans provides an interactive learning experience with group work and time for discussion for students’ that is not solely Regents test preparation. Student work is utilized to make adjustments to lesson and curriculum. Teachers use results from Regents exams and Regents type questions designed as exit tickets to modify instruction, revise lesson plans and reteach skills and concepts. These revisions are mutually agreed upon in teacher team meetings and strategies to support students in lessons are developed collaboratively. For example, the math team discussed how they use errors from student work and Regents exam responses to clarify concepts for students. The English Language Arts (ELA) teacher discussed how she works with other content teachers to provide support to address revealed flaws in students’ written responses for assessments in history and science. These adjustments are based on students' needs and ensure that all students have access to the curricula. 2018-19 SCEP-P 15  In a history class, focused on students were asked to choose a question from a variety of options, that they would respond to by providing text-based evidence for their claim as well as an explanation of how the text supported their answer. In a math class students were able to provide a variety of ways that they could prove that a quadrilateral was a parallelogram either by using formulas for the slope of a line or by demonstrating their thinking and sharing their strategy with classmates. However, across several other classrooms teacher questioning was mostly teacher directed and did not prompt higher order thinking or student to student discussion. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, our goal is to improve Regents results and we are working to have a 5% increase in English, Algebra, U.S. History, Living Environment and Global Studies. 2018-19 SCEP-P 16  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Teacher teams (English, Social Studies, Mathematics and Science) will meet three times per week during zero period engage in the inquiry process as they plan, look at student work, review and revise curricula, and provide support to their colleagues. All teachers will use the Danielson Rubric and Equip rubric to gauge the effectiveness of their work and will use class made assessments to determine progress. Our professional development sessions hosted by our Generation Ready Consultant will allow teachers to become more familiar with the Danielson's rating structure. We will study highly effective and effective components and build our lesson plans using these guidelines. Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) General Education, SWDs, and ENLs Fall and spring semester Principal and Assistant Principal All Teachers Principal, Assistant Principal, Generation Ready Consultant During our orientation sessions our parents are made aware of our academic standards and our instructional goals. All Parents On-going (September - June) Principal, Assistant Principal, Guidance Counselors 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. During orientation sessions, Open School Week, and our quarterly newsletter we will make sure parents are clear about our goals. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. The monies assigned to TL Fair Student Funding, Title 1 SWP and SIG Grant budget for the 2017-2018 school year will enable the aforementioned goal(s) to be achieved. On February 7, 2019, we engaged parents and the community through our school receivership hearing, where the public provided feedback and developed recommendations for the improvement of the school. This year’s recommendations include:  Conduct additional outreach to students to improve attendance. 2018-19 SCEP-P 17   Increase funding for the school’s Learning to Work program. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA PTA Funded X P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. MOTP / Advance Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-P 18  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 5 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 5.2 The school leader establishes overarching systems and understandings of how to support and sustain student social and emotional developmental health and academic success. 5.3 The school articulates and systematically promotes a vision for social and emotional developmental health that is aligned to a curriculum or program that provides learning experiences and a safe and healthy school environment for families, teachers, and students. 5.4 All school stakeholders work together to develop a common understanding of the importance of their contributions in creating a school community that is safe, conducive to learning, and fostering of a sense of ownership for providing social and emotional developmental health supports tied to the school’s vision. 5.5 The school leader and student support staff work together with teachers to establish structures to support the use of data to respond to student social and emotional developmental health needs. X SOP(s) Addressed Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? Our most recent Quality Review states, In order to ensure that college and career readiness skills are promoted for all students, the school has adopted the workshop model for all content areas. The structure provides opportunities for teachers to model a skill or strategy, time for students to practice with teacher guidance and then engage in independent practice. This approach is of utmost importance in a transfer school because our students must quickly develop academic skills. Our ability to place incoming students into a Family Group setting and established all students in Attendance Groups helps to make the school smaller because our students are supported by more than one adult in the building. History shows our ability to connect with the students and their parents and/or guardians is a key component to helping students move towards graduation. 2018-19 SCEP-P 19  Our most recent School Quality Snapshot shows the majority of our students say adults in the school help to keep them on track. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools –Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, members of our guidance team and CBO advisors will dedicate three Saturdays each marking period to assist struggling students in targeted support sessions that provide opportunities for Regents prep and completion of missed classroom assignments; and we will monitor this work each marking period through a review of report card and teacher data to identify students for ongoing support sessions in November, January, April and June. 2018-19 SCEP-P 20  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). CBO and Attendance support members will meet weekly to discuss and improve attendance patterns. These meetings will allow us to target students with negative patterns earlier so we can make changes and positively influence their academic progress. Students and parents Fall 2017 and Spring 2018 Team members review student progress reports and regents data to determine appropriate next steps. Students Fall 2017 and Spring 2018 Our ongoing calls and home visit to inform parents about academic and social progress. These calls will determine the level of intervention required to properly support the family. Students and parents Fall 2017 and Spring 2018 Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Principal, Assistant Principal, CBO and attendance support members Principal, Assistant Principal, CBO and attendance support members Principal, Assistant Principal, CBO and attendance support members 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. The weekly calls made to support families by our administrative team, guidance team, CBO, and attendance support members. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. The monies assigned to TL Fair Student Funding and Title 1 SWP budget for the 2017-2018 school year will enable the aforementioned goal(s) to be achieved. . Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA P/F Set-aside 21st Century C4E 2018-19 SCEP-P 21  Title I 1003(a) Title III PTA Funded X SIG Grant School Achievement Other Funding Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2018, based on the data, we will have developed a clear plan of action for 80% of the students at the school. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Attendance, report cards, regents and parental outreach (Action Plan) Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-P 22  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 4 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 4.2 School and teacher leaders ensure that instructional practices and strategies are organized around annual, unit, and daily lesson plans that address all student goals and needs. 4.3 Teachers provide coherent, and appropriately aligned Common Core Learning Standards X (CCLS)-based instruction that leads to multiple points of access for all students. 4.4 Teachers and students work together to implement a program/plan to create a learning environment that is responsive to students’ varied experiences and tailored to the strengths and needs of all students. SOP(s) Addressed 4.5 Teachers inform planning and foster student participation in their own learning process by using a variety of summative and formative data sources (e.g., screening, interim measures, and progress monitoring). Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Our most recent Quality Review states, Teaching Teams meet daily during the schools Zero Period. Teachers indicate that the opportunity to work together on the implementation of the Common Core Standards and the instructional shifts has allowed them to strengthen their individual pedagogical capacity. The math team as well as the other content area teams comprise two to three teachers each and use their meeting time to discuss strategies for supporting individual and groups of students based on needs identified in the analysis of students work. As per the Quality Review, we will address questioning so students play a more active role it this process and so their questions can enhance student to students discussions. . 2018-19 SCEP-P 23  Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, all teachers will engage in intervisitations during the fall and spring, where teachers critique and support their peers through low-inference feedback that allows teachers to determine appropriate next steps for planning of instruction and selection of curricular resources to support student achievement. 2018-19 SCEP-P 24  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Teachers will meet a minimum of 6 times with the consultant. These sessions will allow teachers to plan together and to develop a clear understanding of our instructional focus. Core Department teachers September 17- Principal and Assistant Principal June 18 The teachers will be assigned a staff member to visit based on information gathered through the informal and formal observation process. Teacher will be assigned to observe a peer during our monthly departmental meetings. All teachers November–December 2017 and Principal and Assistant Principal April – May 2018 Teachers will use Mondays and Friday during zero period to communicate with parents. All teachers September 17- Principal and Assistant Principal June 18 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. During zero period on Monday and Friday teachers will use various tools to communicate with parents. In addition, they will use our CBO partner when they are unable to reach parents. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. The monies assigned to TL Fair Student Funding and Title 1 SWP budget for the 2017-2018 school year will enable the aforementioned goal(s) to be achieved. Our pedagogical, support staff, and after school programs consume the bulk of our monies as we work offer a variety of options. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other 2018-19 SCEP-P 25  Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Advance reporting / MOTP Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-P 26  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 2 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 2.2 The school leader ensures that the school community shares the Specific, Measurable, Ambitious, Results-oriented, and Timely (SMART) goals/mission and long-term vision inclusive of core values that address the priorities outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP). Leaders make strategic decisions to organize programmatic, human, and fiscal capital resources. 2.3 2.4 The school leader has a fully functional system in place aligned to the district's Annual Professional Performance Review (APPR) to conduct targeted and frequent observation and track progress of teacher practices based on student data and feedback. 2.5 Leaders effectively use evidence-based systems and structures to examine and improve X critical individual and school-wide practices as defined in the SCEP (student achievement, curriculum and teacher practices; leadership development; community/family engagement; and student social and emotional developmental health). SOP(s) Addressed Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Our most recent Quality Review and PPO states that the administrative team consistently communicates high expectations to staff based on the Danielson Framework for Teaching and provides the appropriate training in each of the components of the Framework to make sure the teachers can be held accountable for those expectations. As per our Quality Review, across classrooms student discussion is minimal as it is mostly teacher directed and often limits the participation of many students . As a result, we will encourage teachers to structure lessons that allow student to appropriately engage with their peers. 2018-19 SCEP-P 27  Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART– Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, the administrative team will use the topics covered during weekly Professional Development sessions to guide the feedback provided to teachers as they conduct walkthroughs and observations. 2018-19 SCEP-P 28  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Timely feedback allows teachers to address areas of concern and make the adjustments required to improve the way students learn. The administrative team will create a plan that allows them to visit teachers on an ongoing basis. Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) October – May 2018 Principal and Assistant Principal All teachers assigned to the school leaders for formal and informal observations The Circular 6 R professional development team will work with the teachers throughout the year. The Regents data will determine the students (Gen Ed, SWDs, ENLs) assigned to these weekly sessions. Specific students Principal and Assistant Principal Fall 2017 and spring semester 2018 All parents will be informed about our monthly meetings and will be encouraged to attend. Attendance team members will remind them about our gatherings throughout the school year. All parents On-going Attendance Team members. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. The weekly calls made to support families by our administrative team, guidance team, CBO, and attendance support members. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. The monies assigned to TL Fair Student Funding and Title 1 SWP budget for the 2016-2017 school year will enable the aforementioned goal(s) to be achieved. Our teachers will be supported by a Generation Ready consultant and the funds will allow for ongoing professional support and development. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA P/F Set-aside 21st Century C4E 2018-19 SCEP-P 29  Title I 1003(a) Title III PTA Funded X SIG Grant School Achievement Other Funding Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February, 2018, the data gathered during observations will inform the focus of our spring professional development agenda. Any lagging indicators will allow our consultant to design appropriate professional development in the spring. The feedback provided during observation cycles will be a starting point for future observation. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Advance and MTOP Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-P 30  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 6 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 6.2 The school leader ensures that regular communication with students and families fosters their X SOP(s) Addressed high expectations for student academic achievement. 6.3 The school engages in effective planning and reciprocal communication with family and community stakeholders so that student strength and needs are identified and used to augment learning. 6.4 The school community partners with families and community agencies to promote and provide training across all areas (academic and social and emotional developmental health) to support student success. 6.5 The school shares data in a way that promotes dialogue among parents, students, and school community members centered on student learning and success and encourages and empowers families to understand and use data to advocate for appropriate support services for their children. Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. As per our Quality Review, parents indicate that they receive frequent communication from the school leaders and teachers about their children's ongoing performance in the class as well as attendance and feel they understand where students are with regard to credit accumulation and progress towards graduation. As per our attendance reports we understand that we must inform parents of negative attendance patterns in a timely manner so they can provide immediate assistance in this area. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. 2018-19 SCEP-P 31  By June 2019, in order to take advantage of the Tuesdays set aside for increased parental involvement, we will have our School Leadership Team meetings immediately after-school once per month on a Tuesday; the timing of these meeting will allow students, parents and staff to work together as we set school specific goals. 2018-19 SCEP-P 32  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Orientation will be used to make sure parents are clear about the expectations for their child as they move towards graduation. All new parents will be invited to meet key members of the school community. As the year progresses, we will make sure the staff member assigned to support each parent communicate the number grades in the fall and spring. Our school newsletter Bronx Regional Speaks sent twice each semester. The schools Annual Health Fair The parents of all new admits October 17, January, April, Principal and Assistant Principal June 18 The parents of all new admits All parents and staff. Principal, Secretary, Assistant Principal 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. East Side House Settlement Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. The monies assigned to TL Fair Student Funding and Title 1 SWP budget for the 2016-20176 school year will enable the aforementioned goal(s) to be achieved Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA PTA Funded X P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century C4E School Achievement X Other Funding Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2018, we will review attendance data to determine next steps and target parents for increased participation. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. 2018-19 SCEP-P 33  Open school visits and call log from CBO and attendance support members. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-P 34  Section 6: Expanded Learning Time (ELT) Program Description Directions: Expanded Learning Time activities are directly aligned to the elements of the Framework for Great Schools, Rigorous Instruction, Supportive Environment, and Strong Family and Community Ties. ELT provides enriching educational experiences that happen outside of the traditional school day and blend skill acquisition, relationship-building and fun to foster academic and social-emotional growth. Summer learning, afterschool programming, and extended-day ELT models, when well-implemented, play a critical role in supporting students in all grades and ensuring that they graduate from high school, college and career ready. SED requires that Priority schools offer a minimum of 200 additional student contact hours as Expanded Learning Time in addition to the current mandated length of 900 hours of instruction per year (25 hours per week) in grades K-6 and 990 hours of instruction per year (27.5 hours per week) in grades 7-12. Effective ELT models will blend school staff with community partners, and will provide a balanced curriculum that can include ELA, Math, STEM, arts, physical activity, and leadership development. Complete the sections on this page to demonstrate how the school will meet these requirements. Part 1 – ELT Program Goal(s) Describe the summative goal(s) of the ELT program for the 2018-19 school year. Be sure to construct the goal to be SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Realistic, and Time-bound. N/A Part 2 – ELT Program Type Is the ELT program voluntary or compulsory? X Voluntary Compulsory If the ELT program is voluntary, indicate how you will actively encourage the participation of all students, with the goal of serving at least 50% of students. Our students will be encouraged to attend after school programs linked to their specific graduation needs. As indicated staff members assigned to specific students will make their parents aware of the options we have during the fall and spring. Part 3 – ELT Program Description The ELT program will be offered to all students eligible for Academic Intervention Services (AIS), with the goal of serving a minimum of fifty percent of AIS-eligible students. Describe how the school will meet the following SED requirements for an ELT program in a Priority School:  Integrate academics, enrichment, and skill development through hands-on experiences that make learning relevant and engaging.  Offer a range of activities that capture student interest and strengthen student engagement in learning so as to promote higher attendance, reduce risk for retention or drop out, and increase the likelihood of graduation.  Actively address the unique learning needs and interests of all types of students, especially those who may benefit from approaches and experiences not offered in the traditional classroom setting.  Contain components designed to improve student academic, social, and emotional outcomes, including opportunities for enrichment programs such as in music and art.  Ensure instruction in any core academic subject offered in the program will be delivered under the supervision of a teacher who is NYS certified in that particular content area.  Engage in outreach activities made to families. At the start of the school year, we will discuss what is expected as it relates to students performance during assemblies and how their work will determine who gets to make progress in our Learning To Work program supported by East Side House Settlement our new CBO. We will ask students to offer suggestions about ways to help them learn and to produce at a higher academic level. The ideas will be presented to the various teacher teams to see 2018-19 SCEP-P 35  how the ideas can be structured in a way to help students (General Ed., ENLs, SWDs) . Our zero period meetings will facilitate these conversations and allow use to create the structures that will help to improve things. At the heart of these conversations will be the desire to have the students buy into programs and to make tangible progress. Our surveys will determine when and where these programs take place. We are open to before/ after school or weekend. We will have the standard regents’ prep, tutoring, and online preparation options. We started working with Minnie’s Pantry Project out of Texas and they have promised to support use as we devise ways to help more students to graduate. We hope this team will provide concrete monthly incentives to positively influence students. Our offerings will include: Tutoring/ Regents preparation Art and music classes Counseling Part 4 – ELT Program Implementation and Oversight Part 4a. Who will implement the ELT program? Who will oversee the program? 1. Indicate the key personnel that will be responsible for implementing and overseeing the ELT program, including school-based staff and any high-quality community partners that will be involved. If applicable, describe the scope of involvement of all community partners and how the joint ELT program is structured. 2. 3. Explain how you will evaluate the program to assess impact on student achievement. Assistant Principal, our grant implementation team, assorted community partners. We will set and monitor goals after our initial meeting in September/October. Part 4b. Timeline for implementation and completion, including start and end dates. Fall 2017 and spring 2018. Part 5 – ELT Budget and Resource Alignment Part 5a. Indicate resources needed including human resources, instructional resources, and schedule adjustments to implement the ELT program. A large percentage of the budget will be used for teacher pro-rata and per session. Our survey responses will determine where the balance of the money goes. The survey will be fashioned, distributed and collected and implemented during the fall semester. Part 5b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support the ELT Program. Note: If the program is funded by 21st Century Community Center Learning Funds, it must be offered in conjunction with a high quality, high capacity community partner. 21st Century Title I 1003(a) Tax Levy Title III Title I SWP PTA Funded Title I TA P/F Set-aside SIG Grant School X Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 6 – ELT Progress Monitoring 2018-19 SCEP-P 36  Part 6a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. February 2018. Part 6b. Indicate the instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Report cards and Regents results. Part 6c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-P 37  Section 7: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Mathematics Science Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) Small group sessions. Small group sessions. Small group sessions. Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Our program allows teachers to assess the students’ skills and to put a plan in place to help them as they work towards passing the Regents. Our program allows teachers to assess the students’ skills and to put a plan in place to help them as they work towards passing the Regents. Our program allows teachers to assess the students’ skills and to put a plan in place to help them as they work towards passing the Regents. Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Students who need to pass the English Regents in order to graduate. These students have failed the state examination multiple times and/or have earned all the required credits in the subject area. Students who need to pass the Algebra and/or Geometry Regents in order to graduate. These students have failed the state examination multiple times and/or have earned all the required credits in the subject area. Students who need to pass the Living Environment Regents in order to graduate. These students have failed the state examination multiple times and/or have earned all the required credits in the subject area. When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) During the school day specific students (in need of Regents support) will be allowed to leave their regularly scheduled class to work with the teachers providing additional regents’ support as their circular 6 assignment. During the school day specific students (in need of Regents support) will be allowed to leave their regularly scheduled class to work with the teachers providing additional regents’ support as their circular 6 assignment. During the school day specific students (in need of Regents support) will be allowed to leave their regularly scheduled class to work with the teachers providing additional regents’ support as their circular 6 assignment. 2018-19 SCEP-P 38 Social Studies At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Small group sessions. Our program allows teachers to assess the students’ skills and to put a plan in place to help them as they work towards passing the Regents. One to one, or small group. Our staff is told to refer students in need of additional support to our support team. During the school day specific students (in need of Regents support) will be allowed to leave their regularly scheduled class to work with the teachers providing additional regents’ support as their circular 6 assignment. During the school day or after school depending on the specific needs of the student. Students who need to pass the Global History or United States History Regents in order to graduate. These students have failed the state examination multiple times and/or have earned all the required credits in the subject area. All students in need of social and emotional support. Teacher records, calls from parents or students self- reporting, to the support team. 2018-19 SCEP-P 39  Section 8: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. Counseling, and ongoing distribution of food, clothing, and school supplies. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). During the 2016-2017 school year we had 28 students in the program. We historically have 20 students but will update our budget if more students 2018-19 SCEP-P 40 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. Counseling, and ongoing distribution of food, clothing, and school supplies. are in need. 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. N/A 2018-19 SCEP-P 41  Section 9: Title I Program Information Directions:  All schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the strategies and activities for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, staff, and paraprofessionals that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). We provide an array of professional development options for teachers, principals and paraprofessionals. In addition, we work with a consultant form Generation Ready and she works closely with teachers as they align curricula to the Common Core. She also provides PD on an ongoing basis. We will allow our team to take advantage of the various offerings provided by the Superintendent representatives.. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) 2018-19 SCEP-P 42  Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/information, early intervention services, etc.). N/A 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. As indicated before we work closely with Generation Ready and our consultant has expertise in using and creating assessments. She will provide the guidance required as we select multiple assessments to improve instruction. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds enables, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (SCEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Title I Part A (Basic) Title I School Improvement 1003(a) Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funds Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 194,068.00 0 0 0 1,768,209.00 X X Column B Section Reference(s) 5A - 5E Part 4B 5A - 5E Part 4B 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and 2018-19 SCEP-P 43  advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I School Improvement 1003(a): To support implementation of school improvement activities identified through the Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) reviews or a school review with district oversight and included in the DCIP/SCEP.  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: To support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs.  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent 2018-19 SCEP-P 44  representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan.  Title I Priority and Focus School Parent Engagement Set-aside: Additional set-aside is to enable greater and  more meaningful parent participation in the education of their children. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.  Grant funds awarded via a competitive process, including Title I 1003(g) SIG funds: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 SCEP-P 45  Section 10: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. Bronx Regional High School, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. [Bronx Regional High School] will support parents and families of Title I students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students  providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology;  providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and  decision making in support of the education of their children; fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress;  providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments;  sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand;  providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; 2018-19 SCEP-P 46  The school’s Parent Involvement Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will:  actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact;  engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills;  ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and  strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills;  maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home;   provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report;  host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Every Student Succeeds Act. schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help;    2018-19 SCEP-P 47  The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement  holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference;  hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year;  encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; supporting or hosting Family Day events;   establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents;  encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers;  providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress;  developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress;  providing school planners/folders for regular written communication betweenteacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) School-Parent Compact (SPC) [ Bronx Regional High School, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. 1. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by:  using academic learning time efficiently;    offering high quality instruction in all content areas; respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; 2018-19 SCEP-P 48  providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act. Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships     conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education;  providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact;   providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information;  ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff  ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents;  notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff  member; arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities;  planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; 2018-19 SCEP-P 49 I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents  Provide general support to parents by:    creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents;   ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as  described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Every Student Succeeds Act.Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; 2. II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities  monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent;  ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games;     promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits;  encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child;   participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education;  communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested;   become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact;  participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child;   3. III. Student Responsibilities 2018-19 SCEP-P 50  Student Responsibilities:       attend school regularly and arrive on time; complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; show respect for myself, other people and property; try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; always try my best to learn. 2018-19 SCEP-P 51  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 12 School Name Bronx Regional High School Borough Bronx School Number 480 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Colin Thomas Coach N/A ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher TBD Teacher/Subject Area Carolyn Whaley/SWD Teacher/Subject Area type here Related-Service Provider type here Superintendent Paul Rotondo Assistant Principal Modesta Rodriguez Coach N/A School Counselor Judith Salinas Parent type here Parent Coordinator N/A Field Support Center Staff Member Mark Weisman Other (Name and Title) Ramon Rosado/ Ed. Para C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 0 1 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 262 2018-19 SCEP-P 52 Total number of ELLs 24 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 9.16%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 0 1 2 3 4 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? Bronx Regional is a transfer school and we admit students throughout the school year. Every student and parent or guardian is interviewed as part of our admissions process. During the interview, translators are provided in the home language of preference if required by the student and or parent. ENL students whose native language is spanish are assigned to our bilingual counselor. Students are required to take the Scantron Performance Series in Reading and Math. The results of these, along with state exams, teacher-created assessments and the NYSESLAT will assist the teacher in developing the instructional plan for ENL classes. The majority of our English as a New Language (ENL) students score proficient in the Listening/Speaking modality of the NYSESLAT, but must continue in the ENL program because they have not acquired proficiency in the Reading/Writing modality. Having identified this, our ENL teacher will focus on developing vocabulary strategies, reading comprehension and writing skills both in the Stand-Alone as well as the Integrated ENL class she will co-teach with an ELA teacher. Mastering these skills will enhance student learning in the content areas and enable students to pass the English Regents examination. 2018-19 SCEP-P 53  2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? The ENL teacher meets twice a month with the core subject department teachers to evaluate the progress of or ENL students. They evaluate their progress in their classes as well as their scores on the state exams such as Regents and NYSESLAT. When necessary, supports are put in place and students may be assigned small group instruction (Teacher’ Circular 6 assignment). Parents are informed on students’ progress by their counselor, ENL and General Ed. Teachers. When necessary, translators are used to ensure there is an open line of communication. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? Students’ NYSESLAT scores from previous school year, as well as in class initial assessments and mock regents exams are used as a baseline to identify students’ progress and areas of need. The success of our ENL program will be measured by students’ performance on the NYSESLAT, state examinations (more specifically the ELA Regents), as well as their performance in their assigned classes. We expect students to improve by at least one proficiency level each year. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? The ENL teacher meets with the English department to develop curriculum and lessons that incorporate best practices to enhance learning for ENLs. The ENL teacher will also meet with other departments to assist planning that provides relevant scaffolding and supports for the ENL population. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] N/A 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. A review of our students’ NYSESLAT results reveals that the majority of our students Scored proficient in the Listening/Speaking modalities of the NYSESLAT, but must continue in the ENL program because they have not acquired proficiency in the Reading/Writing modalities. This is also evident in an item analysis of past Regents exams. Teachers also use midterm and final examinations at the end of each cycle and semester respectively, to measure students’ growth of content area. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? Teachers meet in departments three times per week during 0 period. During these meetings, they look at student work, analyze regents data, and adjust their lessons and curriculum to address students’ needs. In addition all departments meet monthly to discuss and share trends and strategies used in each department. The ENL is alloted time to sit in meetings with each department to address ENLs’ performance in the content area. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). 2018-19 SCEP-P 54  a. Freestanding ENL program. At Bronx Regional High School, We have the same bell schedule Mondays through Thursdays, where each period is 46 mins. Fridays, our schedule is abbreviated and each period is 42 mins. This means that each single period class meets a for a total of 226 mins. each week. Our teachers use the workshop lesson plan model, where direct instruction is delivered for no more thatn 15 mins. permitting students time to work independently or in groups on tasks that allow them to practice what they are learning. ENL students spend the majority of their day in all-English content instruction and are brought together for weekly units of study of ENL instruction as per the current CR Part 154 requirements, for English-acquisition-focused instruction as determined by their New York State English as a Second Language Achievement Test (NYSESLAT). Our student grouping is ungraded and heterogeneous. b. TBE program. If applicable. NA c. DL program. If applicable. NA 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? Due to the nature of our program, instructional time will exceed the required time as per CR Part 154-2. Entering students will be programmed for 2 units of Stand-Alone (452 mins./wk.) and 1 unit of Integrated ENL with an ELA class (226 mins./wk.) Emerging students will be programmed for 1 unit of Stand-Alone (226 mins./wk.) and 1 unit of Integrated ENL with an ELA class (226 mins./wk.), Transitioning and Expanding students will be programmed in 1 unit of Integrated ENL with an ELA class (226mins./wk.) Former ENLs or Commanding students will also be programmed for 1 unit of Integrated ENL (226 mins/wk.) The Assistant Principal will monitor counselors' programming of ENLs both in the fall and spring semesters to ensure they are programmed accordingly. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. Content area subjects are delivered in English with some first language support in the subjects where the teacher speaks the same language as the students. Teachers differentiate instruction and use different approaches and methods to provide ENLs and ENL-SWDs with a point of entry varying on their language skills. Teachers may provide students with annotated text, first language support, or a content area thesaurus. Students are grouped with students who have a strong grasp of the content area subject and the students’ first language. ENLs and Former ENLs are allowed to take state examinations both in English and their native language, the use of glossaries, as well as extened time. Students are instructed and assessed in all four modalities throughout the year both formally and informally throughout all the content areas. Students are engaged in reading, writing, speaking, and listening on a daily basis through lesson plans and evaluations that are aligned with State Standards and the Common Core Learning Standards. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? During our admissions process, each student takes a placement test (Scranton Performance Series), to assess their reading and math skills. Students and families are interviewed in their language of preference. Students are assessed through formative and summative assessments in their classrooms throughout the school year. ENLs and Former ENLs are allowed to take state examinations both in English and their native language. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. Long Term 2018-19 SCEP-P 55  e. Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status SIFE students are assessed through several diagnostic tests to see if there are any deficiencies in their content subject knowledge. Teachers work closely with students to fill in these knowledge gaps throughout the year. The ENL teacher will also be available to provide additional support in PM Regents prep classes exclusively for English Language Learners. In addition, students will be programmed for small group instruction to meet with content area teachers during their Circular 6 assignments. Newly enrolled ELL students are placed in a Family Group. This class allows a teacher and social worker to help students transition more smoothly into the school. This group, composed of no more than 15 students meets daily for half a semester (45 days). Two of the five days will be spent improving literacy and numeracy skills. The remaining three days are dedicated to skill acquisition through assorted group building activites. Newcomer--Due to the fact that we are a transfer school, students arrive at Bronx Regional High School after attending other comprehensive New York City High Schools and consequently, we do not have any students who are classified as newcomers. In the event that we do get Newcommers, they will be programmed in Family Group, where they will receive social support to transition into our program. Developing and Long Term ENLs -- Students will be programmed per the Part 154 mandates. They will be programmed in integrated ENL to support their language acquisition. Former ENLs are will continue to receive 226 mins./wk of Integrated ENL in ELA content area for two additional years. Teachers will monitor their progress closely to detect if they will need academic intervention. They will still have access to PM classes and small group instruction during Circular 6 for Regents preparation. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? Our ENL classroom is equipped with Laptops, a Smart Board, text books, learning centers and an extensive classroom library with books for each level of proficiency. The library will be upgraded as our school focuses on the needs of our ENL population. The ENL and Special Needs teacher will collaborate weekly with the ELA teacher to plan lessons that address different points of entry making instruction accessible to students based on their individual needs. Students will be programmed in Integrated ENL classes, allowing the ENL teacher to provide academic support by pushing into core English classes. ENL students will also be programmed for Academic Intervention Services, where they will receive small group instruction and at times one-on-one tutoring sessions from their content core area teachers. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? Due to the fact that we have only 1 Special Needs teacher, we only offer SETTS. SWD are programmed for 1 period of SETTS and are mainstreamed the rest of periods. Teachers are encouraged to meet with the SETTS teacher to review students' IEP goals. They are mindful of their goals and are encouraged to differentiate their lessons and address different entry points in their lesson in order to meet students' individual goals. 2018-19 SCEP-P 56  8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. Intervention services for ENLs range from one-on-one and small group tutorings sessions in the content areas during teachers’ Circular 6 assignment to push in for Integrated English ENL classes. In all content areas, teachers differentiate, provide visuals, graphic organizers and scaffold their lessons to provide additional support for our ENL population. We offer PM classes and Small Group Insruction, where teachers work closely with students to address their areas of deficiencies. The ENL teacher meets with teachers from the core departments and share strategies to assist our ENLs in mastering the skills required to pass the classes and state examinations. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? For the upcoming year, we will consider incorporating more Integrated ENL in more content areas, specifically science and social studies classes. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? We have never held a bilingual program. We do not plan on discontinuing any of our ENL programs, as they are needed to assist students in language acquisition and meeting the graduation requirements. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. Our ENL students are not excluded from any of our programs. They have equal access to after-school program, small group instruction, and online courses. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. The ENL classroom is equipped with Laptops, a Smart Board, text books, learning centers and an extensive classroom library with books for each level of proficiency. The library will be upgraded as our school focuses on the needs of our ENL population. I Learn software for one-line credit acquisition, as well as Castle Learning for content area review provide reading and translation support. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? We do not offer DL or TBE in our school. We implement the ENL model and our students are supported in their native language by the ENL teacher. In the content area, they are supported with the use of glossaries, dictionaries and visuals. Most of our ENL students are native spanish speakers and our bilingual guidance counselor, as well as the school’s Social Worker provide guidance in the student in the students’ home language. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. Upon admission in our program, students' transcripts and exam history is carefully reveiwed to ensure they are programmed properly in classes needed to meet the 44 credit requirement to graduate, to prepare them for state examination and classes that would enable them to master the English language. The additional support provided for our ENLs focus on enhancing language acquisition. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? The ENL classroom is equiped with Laptops, a Smart Board, text books, learning centers and an extensive classroom libarary with books for each level of proficiency. The library will be upgraded as our school focuses on the needs of our ENL population. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). 2018-19 SCEP-P 57  Newly enrolled ENLs, as with all new admits, are required to attend an orientation. During this orientation, they are adressed by the Principal, Assistant Principal, School Social Worker, Couselor, Conflict Resolution Mediator, Teachers and staff from the School-Based Montefior Clinic. They have the opportunity to learn about the support services offered at the school. ENLs also take part of a general assembly conducted at the beginning of the school year. During their first semester, they are programmed in a Family Group class. The ongoing orientions and Family Group classes are geared to assimilate students so they can become familiar and comfortable with our school community. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? We do not offer any language electives. Currently, the only language course we offer is Spanish. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? N/A Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? The ESL teacher, special education and the other content area teachers participate in three weekly, 42 minutes department meetings. These sessions allow teachers to work together and collaborate with teachers in other core subject areas. During these sessions, teachers are exposed to a variety of strategies such as diverse elements of Differentiated Instruction, the use of technology to enhance instruction, among others to enhance students’ language acquisition skills. The ENL teacher and other teachers are encouraged to attend outside professional development sessions hosted by our Superintendent and the BFSC. In addition, this year, she will work cloesly with the English Department as teacher teams use students work to devise ways to help all students. The ENL teacher will also attend outside Professional Development to enhance her skills and will will turnkey what she learns as she supports her peers in the building. In addition, this year, she will participate in monthly ELL Institute. She will attend Professional Development conducted by Generation Ready Coach and the UFT Teacher Center. These workshops will focus on aligning instruction to the Common Core Learning Standards, with a focus on critical thinking, writing and the development of rubrics to assess student writing, among other topics. The guidance counselors, Language Allocation Coordinator and the Assistant Principal will also attend PDs that address ENLs at the Borough Field Support Center. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. As indicated, as an ungraded high school we do not have 8th grade transition(does not apply).Administration will ensure at least 15% of the total PD hours for content area teachers as well as 50% total PD hours of ESL teachers will be ELL-specific, directed to address how to enhance class instruction to meet the needs of the ENL population. Teachers will be required to maintain a log and meeting agendas of the Professional Development they attend throughout the year. 2018-19 SCEP-P 58  Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? The age of our students and the frustration they and their parents have had in other schools limits the level of parent participation. However, we do have a small but active Parents Association Team and a School Leadership Team. Parents are encouraged to join the PTA and School Leadership Team. Teams meet monthly and bilingual members of the team (Bilingual School Counselor and an Education Paraprofessional) are available to provide translation. During these meetings, as well as Parent-Teacher Conferences, translators are available to ensure parents understand their child’s progress and maintain an open line of communicaion between teachers and parents. All ENLs are assigned to a bilingual guidance counselor, who is able to communicate with parents in their home language to ensure parents are aware of their child’s academic progress. In addition to the Parent-Teacher Conferences held twice a year, the counselor will meet with the parents of ENLs to keep them abreast of their child’s performance. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. The ENL teacher, as well as content area teachers are available Mondays and Fridays during 0 period to communicate with our parents. We require at that they have at least one one-on-one meeting each semester. When necessary, translators are provided to ensure parents can communicate effectively with the content area teachers. The bilingual guidance counselor will conduct workshops to discuss graduation requirements and inform parents of the CUNY and FAFSA application process. Counselors will keep a log of these sessions readily available for the administrators. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. 2018-19 SCEP-P 59 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Colin Thomas, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 SCEP-P 60  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: Bronx Regional High School School DBN: 12x480 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Thomas Colin Title Principal Modesta Rodriguez Assistant Principal TBD Parent Coordinator ENL/Bilingual Teacher Parent Carolyn Whaley/ Special Ed Teacher/Subject Area Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach Judith Salinas School Counselor Paul Rotondo Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Mark Weisman Ramon Rosado/Ed. Para Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 6/30/17 6/30/17 6/30/17 6/30/17 6/30/17 6/30/17 2018-19 SCEP-P 61  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 12X480 School Name: Bronx Regional High School Superintendent: Paul Rotondo The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Ramon Rosado Ed. Para Yes Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. The second phase of our enrollment process consists of an interview of the student and parent or guardian with a counselor or the Assistant Principal. Prior to the interview, the Programming Office and our Educational Paraprofessional run reports pertaining to the students in ATS (RCPL, RAPL), SESIS and STARS. During the interview, these reports are reviewed and parents are asked to identify their preferred written and oral means of communication. This information is captured on the Student Emergency Contact cards (blue cards). In addition, students new to the New York City Public Schools are asked to complete the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS) to determine their home language. Once we determine the language of preference, we make every effort to ensure we can effectively communicate with the parent. A list of all our students and their home languages is maintained in the main office and shared with the entire school staff during our monthly staff meetings. We have translators on site for Spanish speaking parents. Staff members are provided with a flyer with the information for Over-The-Phone Interpreters Services so they can refer to this service to assist parents who speak other languages 2018-19 SCEP-P 62  2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral English Spanish Albanian Mandinka 274 86 2 1 74.9 23.5 0.55 0.27 276 85 2 2 75.4 23.2 0.55 0.55 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. None Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families New Student Orientation Package Ongoing, as students register Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. Our Language Access Coordinator ensures orientation packages are completed prior to each new student orientation sessions. Assistant Principal reviews translations prior to finalization. School News Letters (Bronx Regional Speaks). This letter informs parents of upcoming school wide activities (Health Fair, Awards Ceremonies, Four times each year ( November, January, March and June) Our Language Access Coordinator ensures orientation packages are completed prior to each new student orientation sessions. Assistant 2018-19 SCEP-P 63  Parent-Teacher Conference, Knowledge for College & Career Day, Regents Examination Schedule) Progress Report/End of Cycle update November, January, April and June. Principal reviews translations prior to finalization. Bilingual Guidance Counselor sends out letter to parents in Spanish language. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school Admissions Conference for Every New Student Arriving at the School Fall Parent Teacher Conference Evening and Afternoon Sessions Spring Parent Teacher Conference Evening and Afternoon Sessions Monthly Parent Teacher Association and SLT meetings. IEP Meetings Ongoing throughout the school year October, 2017 March, 2018 Last Thursday of each month Ongoing plan to provide interpretation service(s)? Bilingual Guidance Counselor and Assistant Principal Language Access Coordinator, Bilingual Guidance Counselor, Assistant Principal and Over-The-Phone Interpreter Services Language Access Coordinator, Bilingual Guidance Counselor, Assistant Principal and Over-The-Phone Interpreter Services 2018-19 SCEP-P 64  Language Access Coordinator and Over-The-Phone Interpreter Services The Language Access Coordinator and Bilingual Guidance Counselor participate in these meetings along with the IEP teacher, a General Ed. Teacher, parent and student. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. In the event of a school emergency, parents will be notified through Synervoice and Kinvolved. The principal makes the announcement in English and the Assistant Principal translates it in Spanish. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. During our first staff meeting in September, Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 will be disseminated to all staff member. The Language Access Coordinator will turnkey language access information to school personnel and will share the Language Access Coordinator (LAC LL Phone Script) to be used as a reference when communicating with parents on how to gain access interpretation. The flyer with the Over-The-Phone Interpreter Services will also be distributed to every staff member. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services 2018-19 SCEP-P 65  Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) Welcome posters are displayed for parent view as they enter the building. They are provided with Parents' Bill of Rights during the intake process and students whose parents do not speak English are assigned to our Bilingual School Counselor. The Language ID Guide will be made available at the front desk to assist parents as they enter the school building. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? The Language Proficiency Team will develop a survey to obtain feedback from parents' to determine how they feel about the services provided by the school's communication process with parents not fluent in the English. language. 2018-19 SCEP-P 66 
