 12X521 School Name: THE METROPOLITAN SOUNDVIEW HIGH SCHOOL Principal: EMARILIX LOPEZ   Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC)   School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information The Metropolitan Soundview High School 321200011521 9-12 1300 Boynton Ave, Bronx, NY 10472 School Number (DBN): 12X521 718-860-8240 Phone Number: 718-860-8232 Fax: Lydia Villanueva lvillanueva@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Geographical District: 12 Superintendent’s Office Address: Email Address: EmarilixLopez Brett Keeports Valerie Torres Emarilix Lopez Marilyn Frias KumbaNyang ArianySantana-Agrimonte Rosalie Minier District Information Michael Alcoff Superintendent: High School Superintendent malcoff@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718-935-3070 Phone Number: N/A Fax: Field Support Center (FSC)   FSC: Bronx Executive Director’s Office Address: Executive Director’s Email Address: Phone Number: Jose Ruiz Executive Director: 1230 Zerega Avenue, Bronx, NY 10462 Jruiz2@schools.nyc.gov 718-828-7776 / (718) 741-8895 (718) 828-6280 Fax:   Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Emarilix Lopez Brett Keeports Valerie Torres Patricia Mack MarilynFrias KumbaNyang ArianySantana-Agrimonte Rosalie Minier JosefaSabando-Losada *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/ UFT Member/UFT Member/Parent   Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/   Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with   the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement   Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? The Metropolitan Soundview High School (MSHS) students build the character, skills and disposition to reach their highest potential in school, within their community and throughout their lives. MSHS offers students a calm and close knit environment, intensive instruction in English and math and individualized attention from teachers. We embrace the mission of serving students from under served neighborhoods by exposing them to a college preparatory curriculum.   2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. Metropolitan Soundview opened in 2011 with 96 freshmen and now has all four grade levels 9 – 12 and 402 students. Current Principal Emarilix Lopez, co-founded the school as AP and has taught English as a Second Language and History for ten years before founding The Metropolitan Soundview High School. The 2018-2019 academic year marks the start of our eighth year and we are proud to have graduated 67% of our seniors in August 2018. We have established school core values of Scholarship, Integrity and community. School initiatives embody these core values. At the Metropolitan Soundview High School all students are required to wear the school uniform of light blue polo shirts and black or blue pants. In addition to NYS curricular requirements, students must complete eighty hours (80) of community service and participate in college and career readiness electives. As part of our college prep vision/mission, all students in the the 9 th grade participate in the Peer Group Connection program and 11 th - 12 th grade undertake a college advisory class that focuses on SAT preparation, college search and application process. Metropolitan Soundview is housed inside the James Monroe High School Campus Building. There is a health clinic on site as well as a LYFE Center that provides day care for children of students. During our after school program students can participate in campus-wide PSAL sports teams and a campus-wide leadership program that emphasizes community service. Extended Learning Time is offered after school and students can participate in school-based clubs including art, dance, flag football, and fitness. In the 2018-2019 year, we will continue participating in the AP for ALL program where we offer Advanced Placement courses in English, Math, Foreign Language and History. We also embed a College and Career Readiness Program for all students through participation in the DOE's College Readiness for All initiative where students and teachers are supported in creating post-secondary plans. Keeping in line with the Framework for Great Schools, Metropolitan Soundview students take nine periods of classes Monday through Thursday, which is approximately 45 minutes longer than the standard 8-period school day, with shortened days on Fridays. To address the broad range of skills, students receive support from teachers through, smaller math and English classes for the lowest performing students, collaboratively taught classes and a strong emphasis on character development through our Peer Group Connection program (PGC). Students in the 9 th grade receive an ELA diagnostic. Students scoring at levels 1-2 participate in our tiered Academic Intervention program utilizing Empower 3000. On or above grade level students in grade 9 are placed in honors English and Math. English and math classes for stronger skilled students run larger, ranging from 25 to 34, and tackle a traditional high school-level curriculum. Among stronger 9 th graders, most take Algebra; however 5% participate in Geometry, having passed the Algebra Regents in 8 th grade. History and Science classes are not broken down according to skill level. We provide Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ICT) classes for IEP students and English language learners. The school day is dedicated to academic classes with very few elective classes. Students take a technology class in the 9 th grade and begin foreign language instruction in Spanish or Italian in 10 th grade. At the junior and senior levels we offer our students Advanced Placement courses in Mathematics, ELA and US History. Students also participate in the College Now program at Lehman College. All 11 th and 12 th grade students participate in our college preparatory program. A core group of 11 th and 12 th graders will participate in a STEM elective and multimedia course. In addition to state mandated graduation requirements all MSHS students must complete 20 hours of community service each year. 0  3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. The school admits a range of students. Forty-one percent (21%) of our school population is comprised of English Language Learners and Students with Disabilities. Students entering The Metropolitan Soundview High School in grade 9 average a level of 2.12 in their 8th grade ELA and mathematics state assessment. Our current instructional program has been developed to meet the needs of our diverse learning population, raise literacy and numeracy levels as well provide students with individualized instruction in a collaboratively taught environment. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. The Metropolitan Soundview High School has experienced success with the Framework for Great Schools in the areas of rigorous Instruction, Supportive Environment, Collaborative Teachers and Trust. Although we have worked on all aspects of the Framework for Great Schools, we have made the most progress increasing student achievement by focusing on the elements of supportive environment and collaborative teachers. These efforts have resulted in 73.1% credit accumulation in grades 9-11 a two percent (2%) increase from the 2015-2016 school year. Additionally, core content departments have maintained an average course pass rate of 65% or higher. This year we will focus on raising student achievement through emphasizing rigorous literacy-focused instruction and building strong family-community ties. 1  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 12X521 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 09,10,11,12 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 429 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 19 19 5 7 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 7 7 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 97.0% % Attendance Rate 91.8% % Reduced Lunch 13.3% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 1.2% 71.1% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 1.9% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 3.06 6% 16% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation 73% 48% 60.4% 4.5% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A NO N/A N/A NO Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A NO N/A N/A NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A YES N/A YES YES No N/A 107 99 80.0% 4.4% 24.5% 22.4% 3.5% 1.2% 2 23% 6.3 N/A N/A 69% 67% 79.8% N/A N/A No No N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A NO N/A N/A N/A N/A NO YES N/A N/A N/A YES 2  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Since the opening of the school eight years ago, MSHS has been steadfast in building capacity with its young staff, focusing tactically on development of instruction, infrastructure, and routines to provide necessary supports to close the achievement gap for the school’s high-needs student body. Incorporating the principles of Universal Design for Learning (UDL), teachers deliberately developed curriculum and scaffolds for learning to ensure that all students have the support they need to access grade level tasks. Across departments, teachers develop common tools for students such as graphic organizers, annotation skills to introduce new topics, lists of signal words for argumentative and persuasive writing, sentence starters, paragraph outlines, and use visuals, videos, and boldface key words in hand-outs to promote students’ learning. Students, including English language learners and students with disabilities, across classrooms, participate in academic tasks that require them to apply and extend their learning. As a result of these practices, 78% of tenth grade students on track toward meeting graduation requirements. Additionally, for 2017-2018, the school achieved a 42% pass rate in Regents’ Algebra CC, and a 58% pass rate in CC English. The 2015 Quality Review confirmed that MSHS has established strong, positive systems and school culture and that teachers are adept at supporting instruction relevant academic experiences that require students demonstrate their higher-order thinking skills and produce meaningful work products. It also revealed that facilitation strategies did not always extend thinking or promote participation across classrooms. In response to the 2015 School Quality Review (SQR) findings, the faculty of MSHS focused on creating student-centered learning environments through a normed understanding of rigor by utilizing the Hess rigor Matrix and Tri-State Rubric to revise curricula ensuring alignment to CCLS. Through the Professional Learning Community structure teachers met weekly to conduct lesson studies and provide one another with peer feedback. Professional development offerings have served to develop school-wide instructional strategies. Academic department teams met weekly to revise curricula, engage in protocols of lesson study and looking at student work. As a school community, MSHS has engaged in teacher led learning walks designed to provide peer feedback in the area of instruction and student engagement. This has resulted in an increase in Advance MOTP data showing a shift from Developing to Effective. 65% of staff were rated effective in 1e: designing coherent instruction, and 41% in 3c: student engagement. Although there has been significant progress made in these areas, our Principal Performance Observation (PPO) feedback from the 2017-2018 school year identified a need to focus greater attention in the area of instructional coherence. Areas of priority to ensure alignment with lesson development and implementation of school-wide practices. In the 2016-2017 school year we introduced the Collins Writing Program to establish school-wide literacy practices and used the PLC structure to incorporate Visible Thinking Strategies in lessons. These practices facilitated the development of a common language for writing instruction. 3  In the 2018-2019 school year we will continue implementation of Collins Writing, Visible Thinking Strategies and Cornell Notes. MSHS will utilize the PLC structure to deepen understanding and strengthen practices of school wide strategies. Our work in Professional Learning Communities (PLC) will support staff in embedding formative assessment practices in daily lessons/units in addition to providing feedback on lesson/task design. To support our teachers in this process, our school will continue utilizing the Danielson Framework for Teaching, the Hess Cognitive Rigor Matrix and Webb’s Depth of Knowledge chart. MSHS will implement student writing portfolios in the 2018-2019 school year. This will promote writing across content and provide students opportunities to demonstrate improved writing by way of revision. Teachers of core courses will maintain student writing/assessment portfolios. Portfolios will be revised four times a year. In-depth analysis of student work is also still a growing skill; therefore another area for focus is establishing the structure of Professional Learning Communities to analyze student tasks and data. Staff will continue implementation of protocol-based discussions to examine student work, assessment data and lesson studies to inform instruction, increase student achievement and revise curricula. Teachers will develop instructional action plans to address areas of improvement revealed in baseline assessments. Through the PLC structure instructional staff will gain a deeper understanding of their learners and design learning experiences to promote critical thinking skills at multiple points of entry. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 75% of teachers will utilize student portfolios improve informational and argumentative writing as measured by a 3% increase in ELA and Math Regent pass rates. as compared to June of 2018. 4  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? The following research-based programs will be implemented to bolster and support instruction: Empower 3000, Apex, Carnegie Learning Common Core Algebra Curriculum. Students in grades 9-12, lowest third Sept. 2018 – June 2019 The school provides one on one teacher support and professional development through Generation Ready and district-based instructional liaisons. ELA, Math and Science Teachers October 2018 – January 2019 Teachers, Students in grades 9-12 Monthly PD cycle will utilize PLC structure to provide teachers with additional time to design coherent instruction and work within small groups to reflect on practice through the use of protocols to look at student work and engage in lesson studies. We are going to continue implementation of PLCs because through the development of a culture of collaboration our school will be able to expand on last year’s professional learning. This protocol will further teachers’ capacity to reflect on their own learning and student growth. Professional development cycles will run in 4-6-week intervals culminating in a feedback session on the 6 th week. Professional development workshops will be determined by the school’s PD committee. Workshops will be led by MSHS’ Master Teacher and Generation Ready Consultants. Baseline, midyear and end of year assessments in Mathematics and ELA will be calendared. Departments will review data, use data to revise units/curricula and monitor growth. Departments and PLCs will analyze performance data. In the 9 th grade, students receive targeted Academic Intervention Services (AIS) through the Empower 3000 . These interventions are designed to increase students reading comprehension and fluency. The classes are tiered by need using Response to Intervention (RTI) best practices. Overage and under credited students work on credit accumulation throughout the school day. Their instructional program includes on-line courses through Apex. This affords them the opportunity to recover credits and advance towards graduation. Principal, Assistant Principal, Teachers, Department Team Leaders Principal, Assistant Principal and Generation Ready consultants Professional Development Committee, Master Teacher, Department Team Leaders, Principal, Assistant Principal and Teachers Students in grade 9 Sept. 2018– June 2019 Assistant Principal, AIS Teachers Students in grades 10 - 12 Teachers Principal, Assistant Principal, Assigned Teacher(s) Professional Development Committee, Principal, Assistant Principal, NSRF 5 The school will establish a Professional Learning Communities (PLC) using Critical Friends Group (CFG) protocols. This will allow teachers to work in small groups to engage in lesson studies, analysis of student work/data. Through this practice teachers will gain in-depth knowledge of their learners and provide appropriate scaffolds and differentiation to their students. Through the implementation of a strong School Leadership Team and Parent-Teacher Association the school community will create space for parent voice. The school will invite parents to participate in workshops and family night events at the school designed to inform parents of academic expectations and how to support their growth. Teachers will use assessment data in conversations with parents/guardians and discuss strategies in support of student's academic growth. Through systematic use of formative and summative data, raising expectations, working towards rigorous instruction, and continued integration of student peer leaders into classrooms to work one to one with students we will create a community of interdependence and collaboration thus fostering an environment where students are comfortable taking risks in an academically challenging environment. Trained/Certified Teachers Sept. 2018 – June 2019 Principal, School Leadership Team, PTA Board, Teachers Parents Students Teachers, Students in grades 9 - 12 Sept. 2018 – June 2019 Principal, Assistant Principal, Departmental Team Leaders, Teachers, Student Tutors 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. The Metropolitan Soundview High School will engage families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and the Common Core through workshops on how the demands of the common core and strategies for support at-home and community resources. We will host parent learning walks to provide our families the opportunities to visit our classrooms. Our Parent Coordinator will organize these events. Workshop(s) and learning walks will take place in September, December, March and May. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Human capital, purchasing of research-based instructional curricula, flexible student scheduling, common planning time, embedded departmental meeting time, additional teaching periods for identified teachers and monetary funding for compensation. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other 6  Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. January 2019 Regent outcomes will be used to monitor progress toward meeting goal. A 1.5% increase in college readiness scores in ELA and Integrated Algebra CC will indicate progress toward goal. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) January 2018 CC ELA and CC Algebra scores will be used to assess progress. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 7  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? The Metropolitan Soundview High School seeks to promote and nurture a safe, supportive learning environment that fosters student achievement. In our first four years we have worked to create a culture that is built upon our staff’s service to students, fosters mutual respect, and helps to build a positive work ethic. In our school’s 2017-2018 Learning Environment survey, our school achieved an 67% in the category of supportive environment and a 88% in the category of trust. Part of our strategy in creating a supportive academic environment is ensuring that teachers are respected by MSHS community stakeholders. Teachers utilize team meetings and staff development to collaborate and grow professionally. It also provides the forum for stakeholders to voice concerns, communicating with their colleagues and administration in a way that ensures timely feedback and follow through. Evidence of our school’s strengths in the Framework of Great Schools - Supportive Environment can be found in our Quality Review and student achievement data. One of our central tasks as a school is to provide avenues for student voice and choice. This is exemplified in our school’s LOCK philosophy: Literacy, Opinion, Choice, and Knowledge. We seek to make students feel safe and integrated into the school culture. Our staff demonstrates a dedicated effort in developing the social-emotional learning that can help students make progress toward established academic benchmarks. Students express trust in their teachers, administrators, and guidance counselors and seek out their assistance when needed. We seek to build a school environment where collaboration, discussion, and empathy inform staff and student decision-making. Partnership with Peer Group Connection was implemented in September 2014 to facilitate the middle school to high school transition. In this program upperclassmen serve as peer leaders, providing valuable support and mentorship to freshmen . During the 2018-2019 school year MSHS will expand its current mentoring programs by providing students in grades 10, 11 and 12 weekly advisory meetings. Students will engage in team building, restorative circles, academic advisement and college awareness through advisory. As evidenced in our school’s 2017-2018 School Survey Report, 70% of students at Metropolitan Soundview High School feel that our school offers enough variety of programs, classes, and activities to keep them interested in school. This ranks above both the Bronx and city average. In addition, 93% of parents are satisfied with the education that their child has received. Both of these statistics are on par with the city average and show that we have placed an emphasis on building a positive and welcoming school environment for all stakeholders. There are some areas related to our culture and environment where our school seeks to improve. One of the key elements of school culture is student engagement with the school community and curriculum. Student attendance is an indicator of disengagement with the school community. While home factors often affect attendance, a lack of engagement and motivation at school can also lead to chronic absenteeism. Overall student attendance for the 2017-2018 school year was 79% according to ATS RSAL Report. The Metropolitan Soundview High School did not experience a change in attendance patterns from the 2016-2017 school year. 8  Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, MSHS students will participate in advisory. Through advisory stakeholders will provide students socio-emotional learning opportunities that will reinforce and actualize our College Preparatory values as measured by a 3% increase in student attendance compared to attendance rates as of June 2018. 9  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Use data from the monthly reports on attendance percentages to identify students who are LTA, or chronically truant. To target these students the attendance team/school will make phone calls, set up parent meetings, and make home visits. We will reward students with demonstrated improvement in attendance. Long term absentees and chronically truant students September 2018 – June 2019 The attendance committee, Principal, Community Associate, and attendance teacher. Attendance team bi-monthly meetings. Our Community Associate will lead the attendance team and make personal phone calls to all absent students. Phone messenger and sms messaging will be utilized to make daily notifications of student absence . PBIS incentive system to reward students for their good attendance. We will do this through perfect attendance dress down passes, LOCK dollar rewards for student who are on time, and publicly recognizing perfect attendance at our monthly Town Hall meetings. All students who are absent September 2018 – June 2019 Attendance Committee, Community Associate Entire student body September 2018 – June 2019 Assistant Principal, Dean, and support staff Chronically absent students Grade Teams, Principal and Attendance Team Development of extra-curricular activities that support college readiness. We will work individually with chronically absent students and implement a dropout prevention based system to monitor their attendance and reward improved attendance. Teachers will follow up with students who are having attendance problems, making phone calls home and having personal conferences with the students. We will use our weekly staff meetings and grade level meetings to communicate this need to teachers and to follow up on progress. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Entire student body September 2018 – June 2019 Administration, grade level leaders, full staff How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. 0  The Metropolitan Soundview High School will engage families and support their understanding of Rigorous Supportive Environment through workshops on how the demands of the common core and strategies for support at-home and community resources. We will host parent learning walks to provide our families the opportunities to visit our classrooms. Our Parent Coordinator will organize these events. Workshop(s) and learning walks will take place in September, December, March and May. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. In order to implement this action plan it will require active participation and effort from all stakeholders in the school community. In particular, we must maintain and utilize a functioning Attendance Committee comprised of the Principal, pupil personnel secretary, parent coordinator and guidance counselor, and our office support staff must use attendance data to focus their outreach. In addition, administration, the dean, guidance counselors and teachers will seek to utilize PBIS as a way of investing students in good attendance. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Every 8 weeks admin and key faculty will devote a department meeting to pause review and reflect upon each goal, assess progress and determine what adjustments are required to ensure our goal is met by close of June 2019. A benchmark goal of a 1.5% increase in student attendance, in January 2019, will be used as evidence of progress toward meeting our target goal by June 2018. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Student participation in extra-curricular activities and attendance percentages will be used to measure and assess progress. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 1  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. During the 2018-2019 school year a strong emphasis will be placed continued instructional coherence through the integration of common practices in the following areas: literacy strategies, pedagogical protocols that promote cooperative and collaborative learning, rubrics and protocols to guide reflective conversations on student work and lesson planning. During observations, we identified evidence of the instructional shifts to ensure alignment between standards, expectations and practice. We then used that information to help shape our staff PD. This year all instructional staff engaged in cycles of learning on Collins Writing, Cornell Note-taking and Visible Thinking Strategies. Teachers also met in content-specific PLCs to engage in lesson studies and provide one another with collegial feedback. Professional development cycles included inter-visitation and lesson studies. In department teams, teachers engaged in lesson study and gap analysis protocol to assess instructional effectiveness, academic impact, reflect on practice and revise curricula. This practice has resulted in maintaining (data) of 9th and 10th grade students on track towards graduation, (data) pass rate with (data) college ready score in ELA and Mathematics Regents. We have also experienced a shift in teacher practice from direct instruction to a student-centered learning approach. Teachers moved from developing to effective on the Advance MOTP rating system. Feedback from 2017-2018 PPO visits revealed our school should focus on development of teacher practice and use of assessments to individualize instruction. The 2015-2016 Quality Review revealed the need to integrate the schools’ belief of how students learn best along with instructional practice. Specifically, The 2015-2016 Quality Review revealed: 1. Varying practices in the implementation of practices to engage all learners. 2. Missed learning opportunities for students to demonstrate their thinking at higher levels that promote personal investment in learning, rigorous verbal debate, and student questioning. 3. Scaffolding practices in consistently yield student participation in high level discussions. Next year we will continue to look at instructional coherence by deepening teacher’s understanding and use of the instructional shifts in their classrooms through the lens of data informed instruction. We will emphasize use of Visible Thinking Strategies learned during 2017-2018 professional development cycles, tools introduced during the 2015-2016 school year and further teacher’s application of these strategies by emphasizing lesson development, data driven instruction, text complexity and multiple entry points through our partnerships with Generation Ready and our use of the PLC structure. Teachers will receive professional development on these strategies from both Generation Ready coaches and school based staff; they will then work in Professional Learning Communities on lesson development and engage in consultancy protocol during weekly Professional Learning time. The protocols used will center on looking at student work and utilizing student work to develop action plans. Teachers will help each other reflect on the effectiveness of 2  their instructional practice and student achievement through peer feedback. This work will be supported through cycles of inter-visitation. Departments will continue to engage in long-term goals and SMART goals through the development of action plans. Action plans are intended to address student content and skill areas of growth, support year-long (long term goals) and will be aligned to the school instructional focus of student-centered learning The overall responsibility of Departments will be to use data to align curricula to instructional shifts, NYS and Common Core standards. Staff will receive professional development on data assessment, item analysis, using data to differentiate, text complexity and protocols to reflect on practice/look at student work/gap analysis from our PD partners as well as Administration and Teacher-leaders. Department Team Leaders will meet with the Principal informally on a weekly basis and formally on a monthly basis. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, ELA and Math teachers will analyze baseline, formative and summative assessment data and develop strategic action plans to address student content/skill needs. These efforts will result in a 3% increase in ELA and Algebra CC Regent outcomes. 3  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Monthly cycles of Professional Development for the 2018-2019 school year planned and created by the PD Committee will center on lesson planning/task design, data analysis and looking at student work. Faculty will receive whole group PD and also work in PLCs throughout the professional development cycle. Weekly lesson studies and data itemization/analysis during department team and PLC meetings. Feedback will be used improve lesson planning, scaffolds and differentiation for high needs student subgroups as well revise curricula. Bi-monthly grade team meetings dedicated to inquiry work via Kid Talk. Grade teams will identify three students, conduct gap analysis, and identify interventions with appropriate follow up to measure progress. Feedback will be used improve lesson planning, scaffolds and differentiation for high needs student subgroups. Grade teams will involve parents of identified students in this process. Parents will receive progress reports and be invited to grade team meetings. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All teachers August 2018 – June 2019 PD Committee, Assistant Principal, PLC facilitators All teachers September 2018 – June 2019 All teachers September 2018 – June 2019 Department Leaders, Department Teams, PLCs, Principal, Assistant Principal Grade Team Leaders, Grade Teams, Principal, Assistant Principal Administration will collect and review performance tasks and provide feedback using the Hess Cognitive Rigor Matrix and Danielson Framework for Teaching and Learning Component 1e. All Teachers January 2019 and May 2019 Principal, Assistant Principal and Master Teacher 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. The Metropolitan Soundview High School will engage families and support their understanding on the demands of the common core and strategies for support at-home and community resources. We will host parent learning walks to provide our families the opportunities to visit our classrooms. Our Parent Coordinator will organize these events. Workshop(s) and learning walks will take place in September, December, March and May. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment 4  Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Human capital, Professional Development time and money, Common Planning Time, Embedded Departmental Meeting Time, Per Diem money to cover teacher schedules. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. A benchmark goal of 1-2 % increase in ELA and Math Regent outcomes in January 2019, will be used as evidence of progress toward meeting our target goal of 3% growth by June 2019 as compared to rates in June 2018. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. January and June 2019 regent scores will be used to measure and assess progress. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 5  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Since the opening of the school eight years ago, the principal has been steadfast in building capacity within his young staff, focusing tactically on development of instruction, infrastructure, and routines to provide supports necessary to close the achievement gap for the school’s high-needs student body. The key needs in relation to Effective School Leadership are to develop and the deliver the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. The goal is based on developing more teacher leaders to lead the department teams, grade level teams and socio-emotional support teams so that students feel supported and receive instruction that improves their academic achievement. This year the goal is to ensure that teachers are consistent and coherent in their use of instructional practices. In effort to support this goal, Generation Ready was selected to work with teachers to develop their pedagogy, lesson planning, and curriculum development, resulting in departmental curricula that are aligned to content standards and Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS). Instructional staff receive continued support in The Collins Writing Program, Cornell Notes and Visible thinking Strategies. These practices have resulted in maintaining 74% of 9th and 10th grade students on track towards graduation, 65% pass rate with 43% college ready score in ELA and Mathematics Regents and an increase of students in the 11 th -12 th grade meeting promotional criteria. Additionally, 57% of students in the lowest third are on track for graduation. In the 2018-2019 school year we will further develop teacher teams through continuing Professional Learning Communities. The combination of PLCs and increased training in use of data will further teacher’s implementation of data driven instruction and lead to increased student achievement. Peer Group Connection was employed to aid students in their transition from 8 th grade to 9 th grade. School-wide monthly advisories was incorporated to sustain positive teacher-student and student-student relationships. As a result of these strategic actions, students express that they are engaged in meaningful learning which has brought them academic success. To further develop teacher teams. Integration of MSHS incentives, PGC and restorative discipline practices have resulted in decreased student suspensions and increased student participation in school clubs and community service activities. Specifically, we have seen a smoother transition with our freshmen this year as compared to previous years. We have seen a reduction in the number of certain behavioral infractions among freshmen - including incidents of insubordination, uniform violations, and student removals. By the end of the 2016-2017 school year, we have decreased student suspensions by 37% and increased mediations for Level 4/5 infractions by 45%. In 2018-2019 we will continue with the current MSHS incentives and PGC program in place. To further support students in grades 10-12, MSHS will implement weekly advisories. Our established team will continue to expand our current incentive system. We will use incentives to improve on our 79% attendance rate. Teachers will participate in grade level team meetings to target three students for the school year. Using inquiry-based practices they will identify 6  interventions, implement and monitor progress. Grade teams will involve parents in this process via conferences and periodic progress reports on Skedula/Pupil Path (our online grading system). Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, MSHS credit accumulation in grades 9,10, 11 will increase by 3% from 73% to 75%. 7  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Academic department teams will meet weekly to work on improving instruction through the use of protocols such as lesson study, evaluating student work and using assessments (data analysis) to guide and revise curricula and lesson plans. Core subject department teachers September 2018 – June 2019 Teacher Leaders Grade teams will identify two students, conduct gap analysis, and identify interventions with appropriate follow up to measure progress. Grade level teachers September 2018 – June 2019 Teacher Leaders Grade teams will involve parents of identified students in this process. Parents will receive progress reports and be invited to grade team meetings. Academic Leaders and Grade Level Leaders will bi-monthly weekly to discuss the work of their teams and revise or create plans for the future. Teacher Leaders September 2018 – June 2019 Administrators Academic Leaders and Grade Level Leaders will submit monthly logs of goals and outcomes. School Leadership Team will meet once a month to discuss school growth, reflect on progress and plan towards the future. Students, Parents, Teachers, Staff September 2018 – June 2019 Principal, SLT constituents 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. The Metropolitan Soundview High School will engage families and promote parent leadership through active parent participation in monthly School Leadership Team and school -wide events, in addition to workshops on how the demands of the common core and strategies for support at-home and community resources. We will host parent learning walks to provide our families the opportunities to visit our classrooms. Our Parent Coordinator will organize these events. Workshop(s) and learning walks will take place in September, December, March and May. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment 8  Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Human capital, Professional Development time and money, Common Planning Time, Embedded Departmental Meeting Time, Per Diem money to cover teacher schedules. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Every 10 weeks admin and key faculty will devote a department meeting to pause review and reflect upon each goal, assess progress and determine what adjustments are required to ensure our goal is met by close of June 2019. A benchmark goal of 1-2 % increase in credit accumulation in January 2019, will be used as evidence of progress toward meeting our target goal of 3% growth by June 2019. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. STARS Credit Accumulation reports will be used to assess progress. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 9  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. According to the 2016 School Quality Guide, scores reflect achievement which supports the school’s goal of closing the achievement gap with the school meeting the target in credit accumulation and exceeding the target in closing the achievement gap. The school provides tiered AIS through the Empower 3000 program for all identified ninth graders. Weekly, academic and behavior recovery is provided; this includes 1:1 academic/behavioral intervention through reflective conversations resulting in goal setting. As a result of strategic attention to student progress, investing in human capital, partnering general and special education teachers, and creating smaller classes for students at most risk, 73% of eleventh grade students are on track in terms of credit accumulation. Through the college prep program, the school supports all students in the college readiness process including college trips, SAT prep, financial aid information, researching colleges, and the application process. The building houses a LYFE Center for parenting students and a School-Based Health Clinic through Urban Health Plan which includes a part-time licensed mental health provider. Despite this success, the school continues to be challenged with chronic absenteeism. In the 2017-2018 school year MSHS experienced similar student attendance patterns from the previous school year, 79%. The ATS RCUA report identifies 16% of students displaying patterns of chronic absenteeism and minimal family engagement. MSHS experienced an increase of chronically absent and LTA students. Some of the underlying factors contributing to the increase in LTA students have been: 1. The number of over the counter (OTC) enrolled students with LTA or chronically absent attendance histories. 2. Increased absences during inclement weather. 3. Personal familial issues. Twenty-three students, comprising six percent (6%) of MSHS’ student population for the 2017-2018 school year are LTA students. Fourteen, approximately four percent (4%) reside in temporary housing. Some of these students displayed poor patterns of attendance in years prior. The attendance team consisting of the Assistant Principal, Guidance Counselor, and Pupil Accounting Secretary, meets to discuss attendance patterns and trends. In the 2017-2018 academic year, MSHS will refine practices within the attendance committee to consistently review and use data in effort to improve attendance for chronically absent students and LTA students. Initiatives will include: 1. Identifying students at risk of being chronically absent and moving forward with an action plan so that the student is attends school. This may incorporate, home communication (phone call, meeting, visit). Conferencing with individual students and engaging in goal setting. 2. Conducting home visits for LTA students and providing supports needed (counseling, goal setting) to re-integrate into our school and/or affording educational alternatives. 0  3. Celebrating students with outstanding attendance and honoring individual students demonstrated improved attendance through incentives. Through the use of data, the school will move towards looking more closely at chronically absent students and devising school-wide, group and individual strategies to address individual needs with a proactive approach towards moving student attendance to 82%. The school recognizes that the current team needs to meet regularly and have access to a menu of universal and targeted strategies, including a system for success mentoring. The attendance team will meet weekly. For the 2018-2019 year the school is continuing its collaboration with “Peer Group Connection” to maintain a cadre of 11th and 12 th grade peer leaders who will work with 9 th graders through the freshman advisory. However, in order to reach its potential, the school recognizes the need to start outreach to all students and families as they begin at the school, and tier student/family support and intervention on an on-going basis. PGC initiatives have resulted in decreased student suspensions and increased student participation in school clubs and community service activities . We have seen a reduction in the number of certain behavioral infractions among freshmen - including incidents of insubordination, uniform violations, and student removals. We will also incorporate school-wide advisory-team building activities twice a month to support student socio-emotional learning and well being. We will continue to promote and build parental involvement by maintaining workshop offerings, family and college awareness nights. Parent leaders, SLT members and school leaders identified the need to provide MSHS families workshops on adolescent issues, high school and college requirements, access & use of on-line grading system. The school acknowledges the need to connect with families early, so that a partnership exists to allow for outreach, referrals and crisis intervention if needed. We will work to expand parent participation in the PTA through increased outreach initiatives. Our parent coordinator will include additional telephone reminders of upcoming PTA meetings. On days of workshops/events we will actively promote and recruit parent members by utilizing a listserv, automated calls, and family dinners for example. Teachers will also continue to communicate daily with families about student’s academics and behavior through the online grading system Pupil Path/Skedula. We will utilize IO Messenger software to increase communication with parents/guardians of students displaying patterns of absenteeism. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, there will be a 5% increase in parent participation in all school-parent partnership areas as compared to rates in June 2019, reaching a total level of parent participation of 15%. 1  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? The following research-based programs will be implemented to bolster and support instruction: Empower 3000, Apex and Peer Group Connection. During parent engagement events families will be made aware of the programs. Parents will receive progress reports in-between marking periods. The school provides one-to-one teacher support and professional development through Generation Ready instructional coaches and network instructional liaisons. September 2018 – June 2019 Students in grades 9-12 Teachers Chronically absent students in grades 9-12 The school will revise attendance team practices that will work to inform the school community of trends and identify/discuss/develop initiatives to improve attendance. Through the hiring of additional pedagogical staff the school is able to provide 15 to 1 instruction in a general education setting for English language learners and students with disabilities. In the 9 th grade students receive targeted AIS services through Empower 3000 reading program. This intervention is designed to increase students reading comprehension and fluency. Overage and under credited students work on credit accumulation throughout the school day. Their instructional program includes on-line courses through Apex. This affords them the opportunity to recover credits and advance towards graduation. They meet with social worker interns on a weekly basis for at-risk counseling and goal setting. Level 1-2 9 th grade students September 2018– June 2019 Ells, SWDs, Under-credited students in grades 9-12 Assistant Principals, AIS Teachers, Guidance Counselors, Teachers Pupil Accounting Secretary, Attendance Teacher, Principal, Assistant Principal, Guidance Counselor, Social Worker Interns Principal, Assistant Principal, AIS Teachers, Guidance Counselor, Social Worker Interns, Through the implementation of a strong School Leadership Team and Parent-Teacher Association the school community will create space for parent voice. The school will invite parents to participate in workshops and family night events at the school. Parents September 2018 – June 2019 Principal, SLT Members, PTA Board, Key office personnel The school will make additional efforts to inform families of important dates and events. Through the Peer Group Connection (PGC) program students will participate in weekly team building activities. Students will receive peer support throughout the day in their classes. Peer leaders will participate in a daily course dedicated to cultivating their personal leadership skills. PGC will hold family night events, 9 th and 12 th grade students September 2018– June 2019 Principal, Assistant Principal, Guidance Counselor, Teacher 2 where parents will engage in team/school community building activities alongside their children Parents of 9 th grade students 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. The Metropolitan Soundview High School will continue hosting a Beacon Program. The Children's Arts and Sciences Workshops provides afternoon, evening and weekend enrichment/sports activities to students and families. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Human capital, purchasing of research-based instructional and socio-emotional programs, flexible student scheduling, and additional teaching periods for identified teachers and monetary funding for incentives/compensation. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. In February 2019 we will review sign-in sheets and monitor the number of parents participating in school events. There was a 10% rate of parent participation as of June 2019, which is concurrent with rates of surveys completed by parents. A 5% total increase in parent participation in school events will indicate school progress toward meeting our goal of 15%. A benchmark goal of 3% will be measured In February 2018 through the collection of attendance sheets of parent engagement activities up until that point. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Parent participation will be monitored through attendance in school-wide parent engagement activities and compared with 2017-2018 rates. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 3  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Normed assessments, Teacher Feedback, Student Request, Parent Request Assessments, Teacher Feedback, Student Request, Parent Request Assessments, Teacher Feedback, Student Request, Parent Request Assessments, Teacher Feedback, Student Request, Parent Request IEPs, Staff Request, Student Request, Parent Request Mathematics Science Social Studies At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) Whole group, small group, one to one, tutoring, peer to peer tutoring. When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) During the school day and after school. After school tutoring. Whole group, small group, one to one, tutoring, peer to peer tutoring. During the school day and after school. After school tutoring. Whole group, small group, one to one, tutoring, peer to peer tutoring. Whole group, small group, one to one, tutoring, peer to peer tutoring. During the school day and after school. After school tutoring. During the school day and after school. After school tutoring. Small group, one to one. During the school day. Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Double periods of ELA in 9 th grade during the school day. Mandated Academic Recovery on Friday, ESL Support Service, Achieve 3000 Double periods of Math in 9 th and 10 th grade during the school day. Blended learning through Apex. Recovery on Friday, ESL Support Services Tutoring after school and/or during lunch, ESL Support Services. Mandated Academic Recovery on Friday Tutoring after school and/or during lunch, ESL Support Services. Mandated Academic Recovery on Friday. Guidance Counselor sessions, Social Worker sessions PGC, Advisory 4  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) As of June 20, 2018, fifty-one students, 12% of our school population, reside in temporary housing. 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. Students receive after school homework help and tutoring. They will also receive at-risk academic and socio-emotional counseling. AIS, double literacy/mathematics block. Students in temporary housing are provided with uniforms and classroom supplies. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 5  N/A 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. MSHS is a Title I school. 6  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. We will continue to fill vacancies by seeking highly qualified teachers through the DOE New Teacher Finder, Open Market and job fairs. Applicants undergo a rigorous interview and demo lesson process. Teachers know the importance of using data and our approach will be a team approach. MSHS has developed an in-house system of one to one mentoring and bi-monthly group mentoring sessions to support new teachers during their first two years in the classroom. Mentors have 5 or more years in the classroom and are part of the the Teacher Leadership program within the Department of Education. MSHS provides in-house and out of school professional development to foster growth and promote retention within our school. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). MSHS’ professional development strategies for the 2018-2019 will incorporate use of the Danielson Framework for Teaching, the Hess Cognitive Rigor Matrix and Webb’s Depth of Knowledge chart to focus on designing coherent lessons. Staff will receive training on the use of data to drive instruction, Collins Writing Program, Cornell Notes and Visible Thinking Strategies. Teachers will continue participating in Professional Learning Communities to examine student work, assessment data and lesson studies to inform instruction, increase student achievement and revise curricula. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 7  3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). N/A 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. The Professional Development Planning Committee will work with the teachers to select and use assessments and choose appropriate PD. Teachers will also meet with their subject departments daily to use assessments to improve instruction. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Federal Federal 402,394.00 0 X 8 Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Column B Section Reference(s) 5A, 5D, 5E  Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Local 12,366.00 0 3,676,729.00 X X 5A 5A, 5B, 5C, 5D, 5E 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the 9  participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 0  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school.The Metropolotian Soundview High School in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students The Metropolitan Soundview High School will support parents and families of Title I students by: ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; 1  ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; The school’s Parent Involvement Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; 2  ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Every Student Succeeds Act. ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) School-Parent Compact (SPC) The Metropolitan Soundview High School, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student 3  achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act. I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; 4  ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Every Student Succeeds Act.Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; 5  II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; III. Student Responsibilities 6  ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 7  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 8  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: The direct instruction supplemental program will take place after school program three times a week, Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday to ensure all ENL students are academically successful. In order to achieve this success, the ENL students must pass all the New York State required regents examinations. Our Title III program will target students that have both taken, but not passed, and not yet taken those required Regents in grades 10-12. Through this program, our ENL students strengthen their skills in the 4 academic modalities, reading, writing, speaking and listening. This supports student preparation for the Spring NYSESLAT exam. An estimated 64% of our ENL students are long term ELLs, therefore, it is important that content and language instruction be integrated daily. When looking at the incoming freshmen students and counting the current 9th-11th graders, the number of ENL students within each proficiency level are Entering: 3 Emerging: 11 Transitioning: 24 Expanding: 48 The Title III program will provide English literacy through content instruction, specifically in Mathematics and Science. Students will also participate in an art enrichment class where they will participate in trips to art museums in NYC. In this course students will integrate reading and writing with classic and contemporary art to tell stories about self and society. Tuesday an ENL and math certified teacher will coteach to provide mathematics instruction. Wednesday an ENL and science teacher will coteach to provide instruction on writing in the science classes. On Thursday the ENL teacher will focus on English language development with a connection to the arts. The 50 ENL students in grades 10-12 targeted for the mathematics and science instruction will be from all subgroups including newcomer, SIFE and Long Term ELLs. All 86 ELLs are invited to participated in our Thursday art program. The schedule for the Title III supplemental program will be Tuesday, Wednesday and Thursday, from 2:45 pm to 4:15 pm. It will be begin Tuesday, November 13, 2018. In total, there will be 54 sessions on Tuesday, Wednesday, and Thursday. All instruction will be in English. The materials used will be past editions of the state Regents, Prentice Hall Regents review books and necessary language support materials, such as glossaries. When necessary, native language material/ activities will be provided in both English and Spanish. Because there are limited printed Bengali materials available to students, our Bengali ENL students will be grouped together to ensure success with understanding through peer support and translations. MSHS will be using in house supplemental materials and NYS resources provided by the NYSED website and EngageNY. These materials will be at no cost to Title III. Attendance records will be kept by the teacher for each session. All attendance forms will then stored in the Title III Binder in the main office. 9  Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: ENL teachers will attend BFSC and DELLSS professional development sessions throughout the year, at no cost to Title III. Additionally, The Metropolitan Soundview High School will provide all teachers ENL focused professional development through professional learning committees. PLCs are oriented for the purposes of adopting best practices in presenting and delivering instruction to English language learners. Teachers will review student work, share and discuss concerns regarding student achievement and language development. Throughout the year, time will be carved out of the 75 minute PDs to turn key and provide staff with additional strategies for ENL students. Attendance sheets and agendas will be kept in our PD binder and a copy will be made for our Title III Binder. The workshop topics are listed below. Presenter/Qualifications 1. Common Language on ELL Instruction Emarilix Lopez, Principal Hands on workshop using The Danielson Framework Components 1e, 3b and 3c to develop a common language on highly effective and effective teaching with the ell student in mind. Teachers will also revisit the various models of coteaching in the ELL classroom. 2. UBD- Unit Design with the ELL students in mind Silvia Patalano, Teacher Teachers will work in grade level teams on differentiating instruction and assessments for ELLs. When analyzing student work, teachers will reflect on their lesson planning, assessments, and scaffolds and modifications provided to the students. 3. Making Thinking Visible Maritza Montilla, Teacher A guided introduction to various visual thinking strategies that support content and language development. Teachers will engage in planning lessons with the various VT strategies in mind, and engage in feedback and reflection about student work. 4. Scaffolding Strategies for ELLs Lauren Ortiz, Teacher A hands-on workshop where teachers work in academic departments to research, identify and present scaffolding strategies that will help Ells access content and progress in second language acquisition. Teachers will engage in discussion about the new NYSESLAT proficiency levels and reflect on how those levels impact their teaching. 5. Data Mining Protocol Krishna Saha , Generation Ready, Coach Teachers will explore how both qualitative and quantitative data are useful. Teachers will be analyzing data from daily lessons, unit assessments, and regents scores to inform their instruction. Teachers will work to modify instruction to meet both the enrichment needs of high-achieving students and the intervention needs of struggling students, especially ELLs. 0  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: The parent engagement activities listed below are targeted for parents of Ells. These workshops will cover essential information for parents on their students' academic progress and strategies to help them be successful. MSHS will invite parents to ensure that they know to ensure that they know the school is a resource for the family. Together we will work to ensure academic success of all students. Title of workshop Presenter/Qualifications Date 1. What does it mean to be college and career ready? Emarilix Lopez, Principal 8/2018 Edwin Frias, Parent Coordinator Parents of ENL students learn of the promotional criteria for high school graduation and how to support their child become "college and career ready." 2. Pupilpath Parent Workshop/ Translating Services Lauren Ortiz, Teacher 9/2018 Hands on workshop to show parents of ENL students how to access Pupilpath and familiarize themselves with the content of the website. Parents/guardians will have immediate access to their child's daily grades, anecdotals, and attendance. Parents will also be made aware of the translations services available through the DOE. 3. Community Resources Edwin Frias, Parent Coordinator 11/2018 BASE and NYPL Connect Ed Program Parents of ENL students are familiarized with the assessments their students must take and are provided with tips and resources to help their child succeed. A presentation of resources available within the community is provided to help parents with financial need (rent) and assistance with accessing Wifi through the New York Public Library. 4. NYSESLAT ENL Department 3/2019 Parents of ENL students will become familiarized with the structure of the NYSESLAT exam. Dates for administration will also be shared. _____________________________________________________________________________________ All workshops will be held after school and will be approximately 1.5 to 2 hours in duration. The school will backpack letters/ flyers in English/Spanish and English Bengali in order to notify parents of the workshops. A school wide phone messaging service will also contact parents in the various languages with the necessary event dates and details. Lastly, these workshops will also be listed on our school website. All agendas and attendance records will be kept in house in the Title III binder. The workshops are at no cost to Title III. 1 Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits)  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL 2  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 12 School Name The Metropolitan Soundview High School Borough Bronx School Number 521 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Emarilix Lopez Coach N/A ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Lauren Ortiz Teacher/Subject Area Shannon Elliott / English Teacher/Subject Area Silvia Patalano- Ross/ History Related-Service Provider Kevin Higgins/ Special Educ. Superintendent N/A Assistant Principal Hilary Gellis IA Coach N/A School Counselor Helena Perez Parent Valerie Torres Parent Coordinator Edwin Frias Field Support Center Staff Member Wladimir Pierre Other (Name and Title) N/A C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 0 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 4 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics 3  Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 412 Total number of ELLs 55 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 13.35% Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 1 2 3 4 K Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 5 6 7 8 0 0 0 0 9 0 0 0 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? Student 8th grade reading and math levels are used to determine placement in ELA and mathematics classes, select appropriate materials and design curriculum so that we are able to meet the needs of our students. Students were also administered a level set exam via the Empower 3000 program which provides teachers with lexile levels. This information is used to determine additional support to students whose lexile levels are below grade level. In addition to the level set, all ELA teachers administered an ELA baseline reading and writing assessment. Students at the entering and emerging levels of proficiency often struggle the most, as the baselines are administered without any scaffolds or modifications. These writing samples were collected from students to determine ability. The lexile levels and baseline assessments assist teachers with student grouping in class. Teachers can decide whether or not to have homogeneous 4  grouping with all students on the same or near the same levels or heterogeneous grouping, mixed levels of proficiency all working together. The Spanish LAB is administered to students that are newly arrived to the DOE. Once scored, teachers are notified of the Native language level. Teachers are encouraged to used this data when looking for Native language material supports. The NYSITELL scores are also shared with the staff to drive ELL programming and classroom instruction. The ENL teachers meet with the various grade levels and departments to discuss what each language proficiency level means. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? Both the Math and ELA departments work diligently to share baseline data with teachers to ensure that students are being programmed and supported correctly. The ENL department members also work to ensure that all ELLs are programmed and supported correctly in their classes. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? The ENL department offers the content teacher some additional strategies to use with the ENL student(s) that is struggling. After reviewing midterm and final assessments, program/ schedule changes can be made to accommodate the student's needs. Content and ENL teachers often engage in inquiry work to examine student work and discuss the progress made / or lack thereof and the necessary interventions needed. The Metropolitan Soundview High School will also evaluate the success of their program for ELLs in the following ways: credit accumulation, progress on NYSESLAT scores, writing increased fluency in speech and increased risk taking in the classroom. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? The ENL department engages in conversation with content teachers during department and grade level meetings. At those meetings, student progress and achievement are discussed. Based on data and conversations, appropriate student specific interventions are put in place. For example, students are provided with certain scaffolds to help achieve daily content and language goals. These scaffolds and data are revisited frequently. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] The Metropolitan Soundview High school targets 9th graders,including ELLs, entering the school with levels 1 and 2 in ELA and Math. Most students are placed into the Empower 3000 program to support reading fluency and English literacy and acquisition. Any students that enter our school with little to no English, can continue with the program in Spanish. It will gradually adjust lexiles in the native language and transition slowly to English with native language support when the student is ready. Metropolitan Soundivew also offers 90 minutes a day of math. Teachers also use this time to pull students, including ELLs, for small group instruction to reteach concepts that were not mastered. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. After reviewing the assessment taken by the ELL population, it was evident that a many students are in the transitioning and expanding levels of proficiency. Students will receive instruction according to the revised CR- Part 154 guidelines. We will monitor the proficiency levels each year as NYSESLAT and Regents scores are released. Improving the outcome of assessments in our ELL population will only occur through joint effort and continual collaboration Metropolitan Soundview HS will use data to inform scheduling for ELLs. We will continue our 90-minute literacy block and a create a co-teaching ENL/ELA, ENL/History and ENL/Science classes for ELLs. Differentiated instruction incorporating the 5  balanced literacy model, point of entry, hands-on approach and modeling strategy are a focus across departments school wide. Within each of the content areas, teacher will use the data for leveled grouping for differentiated instruction and in class assessments. The school will continue to work with the ELL population to strengthen writing skills through the Collins writing program and Cornell Note taking. Structured writing and English language skills (phonics, grammar, syntax, and language mechanics) will also be embedded throughout the curriculum. Empower 3000 - a computer based literacy intervention system that builds individual reading fluency, academic vocabulary and structured writing. Reading Comprehension (reading strategies, note-taking skills, graphic organizers) and common literacy strategies across content areas and grade levels (leveled quality questions, annotating bookmark for annotating text, Jig Saw) Tutoring/ Enrichment programs are available to students Monday-Thursday from 2:40-4:00 pm. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? ELL related discussions with departments to share findings/ gaps and discuss various levels. In addition to the weekly departmental and grade level discussions, important data trends, or curriculum updates are communicated in real time via email. ELL teachers will be engaging in data related PD and share information with coteachers and other staff during grade level meetings. As the EDAT is released, ENL staff turnkey necessary information to staff. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. 1. English Language Learners at Metropolitan Soundview High School receive 100% of instruction in the target language (English). A. Limited English Proficient (LEP) students receive ENL support services via the push-in/pull-out and co-teaching models. Services via the push-in model are provided by an ENL teacher who travels to classrooms with a concentration of ELLs and assists the students in the target language and content teachers in adapting lessons to meet the needs of the English Language Learners. This cumulative effort allows us to reap the benefit of peer support in every classroom. Instruction is lead by a licensed ENL and content-area pedagogue. B. Our students travel together as a group and they are heterogeneously grouped by grade level. ELLs at the entering level of proficiency receive a period of ENL instruction in the Standalone ENL class. This class is serves those students at the entering and emerging levels and is of mixed grade levels. This class affords students the opportunity to take risks and enjoy the English language in a less stressful environment. b. TBE program. If applicable. Paste response to questions here: c. DL program. If applicable. Paste response to questions here: 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? 6  The ENL coordinator and the Metropolitan Soundview programmer work to ensure that all ELL students receive the required units of ENL/ELA instruction according to the CR Part 154-2 (9-12). ELL students at the entering level of English language proficiency receive 540 minutes of ENL/ELA per week. Students at the emerging level of English proficiency receive 360 minutes of ENL/ELA per week. At the transitioning and expanding level of proficiency, students receive 180 minutes of ENL/ELA per week. The organization of staff ensures that the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided to students through scheduling ENL certified teachers to co-teach ELA/ENL and Global History, push-in to Algebra and Science. On a monthly basis, the EDUR is sent to the principal and in turn forwarded to the ENL coordinator. The administration and ENL team work to reprogram students through STARS to meet compliance needs. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. Our ELLs practice speaking, listening, reading, writing and revising their work alongside English proficient students. Classes are heterogeneously grouped. This dynamic not only makes everyone feel part of a learning community but also builds student confidence, which increases risk-taking and accelerates growth and development. English Language Learners at The Metropolitan Soundview High School receive 100% of instruction in the target language (English). Content area teachers receive professional development on how to address the needs of language learners and differentiation of instruction in their subject-area. In order to address the needs of ELL subgroups, teachers utilize the hands-on approach, workshop model and inquiry based learning during instruction, which emphasize modeling and guided practice. English language learners are provided with tiered materials in literacy classes and in the native language for contents such as mathematics and history when available and according to their individual needs. All materials are designed with the NYS Learning Standards in mind. Additionally, the teachers at The Metropolitan Soundview High School work with consultants from Generation Ready. The consultants introduce teachers to new literacy strategies and help the staff to analyze data from student work. Evidence based planning, especially in ELA, takes place with the support of the Generation Ready consultants. The consultants are well versed in the NYS Learning Standards, which helps facilitate meaningful conversations about curriculum and daily activities. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? The Spanish LAB is administered to students that are newly arrived Spanish speaking students to the DOE. Once scored, teachers are notified of the Native language level. Teachers are encouraged to used this data when looking for Native language material supports. Additionally, teachers of ELLs are required to provide students with translated versions of classroom exams when regent questions are utilized. NYS glossaries are available in many native languages for student use. Students are also able to respond in their native language if they are unable to write in the target language. Content teachers work with the ENL teacher in grading student work. In preparation for regent examinations, ELL students receive testing accommodations throughout the school year. During Regent examinations, students have the opportunity to take the exam in their native language if available. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status A - B) Our SIFE students and Newcomers receive a daily 90-minute block of English language instruction and mathematics. Materials are tiered for these students. Translated editions of textbooks are provided when possible. Activities are differentiated according to language proficiency. Instruction is scaffolded. iPAD technology is also available to our students to use when they travel to their classes to support native language access. Students receive ENL assistance in ELA and Global history via the Co-teaching model. Two days a week students receive ENL instruction that focuses on phonemic awareness, reading fluency and writing. After school tutoring is available. Grade level teachers meet weekly to discuss student 7  academic progress and create individualized intervention(s) as needed. (C-D) Long-Term ELLs and ELLs receiving services for 4-6 years receive a 90-minute literacy and mathematics block. Materials are tiered for these students. Students receive additional ENL assistance in Global history class via the Co-teaching model. Instruction is scaffolded with built in support to promote academic writing throughout the content areas. There is a strong use of graphic organizers to aid students in structuring their writing. Long term ELL in grade 9 receive AIS services in literacy via the Empower 3000 program. After school tutoring is available. Grade level teachers meet weekly to discuss student academic progress and create individualized intervention(s) as needed. (E) ELLs reaching commanding on the NYSESLAT are provided continual support through our 90 minute a week program model and after school program. They continue to receive extended time on assessments, both state and teacher-created. They are placed in classes that are co-taught or serviced via push-in depending on classes needed for on track graduation programming. These students receive state mandated testing accommodations. Former ELLs receive test accommodations for up to two years of achieving the commanding score. There is a strong use of graphic organizers to aid students in structuring their writing. After school tutoring is also available to all former ELL students. Grade level teachers meet weekly to discuss student academic progress and create individualized intervention(s) as needed. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? To accelerate the second language development of our ELL-SWD students, teachers meet on a weekly basis to discuss student progress. During coplanning time teachers will use student work to strategically plan lessons that will be academically accessible to this group of students. The instructional strategies implemented center around jigsaw, team learning, transference, word recognition, reading comprehension and fluency. Instruction is scaffolded and sometimes modified to meet the student's needs. There is a strong use of graphic organizers so that students can can organize their writing and are able to work more independently. Writing is monitored throughout the year so that graphic organizers can be strategically lessened throughout the year. Reading materials are tiered as needed in ELA classes. Supplemental materials are tiered by both grade level and proficiency level in order to meet the individual needs of our ELL-SWD students. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? ELL-SWD students are placed in the least restrictive environment according to their IEP. All of our students are in classes that are co- taught with a content area teacher and special education teacher or ENL teacher. Students are scheduled according to their academic needs. An example of our scheduling flexibility would be Co-taught ENL/ELA, CTT Math (Gen. Ed/Sp. Ed.), Global history with ENL push-in and mainstreamed Living environment. This flexibility enables students to receive support in the classroom and challenge students in content area that he/she excel in. Teachers meet on a weekly basis during common planning time to discuss and monitor student progress. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. The intervention programs for SIFE and Long Term ELLs include: co-teaching classes, 90-minute daily literacy and mathematics co-taught classes, AIS Empower 3000, and after school tutoring services. The classes are all taught in the target language however, materials in the native language are provided as needed. After school tutoring schedules are arranged every year to fit student need. The direct instruction supplemental program will take place after school program three times a week, Tuesday, Wednesday, and Thursday to ensure all ENL students are academically successful. In order to achieve this success, the ENL students must pass all the New York State required regents examinations. Our Title III program will target students that have both taken, but not passed, and not yet taken those required Regents in grades 10-12. Through this program, our ENL students strengthen their skills in the 4 academic modalities, reading, writing, speaking and listening. This supports student preparation for the Spring NYSESLAT exam. An estimated 65% of our ENL 8  students are long term ELLs, therefore, it is important that content and language instruction be integrated daily. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? Both ENL and content teacher will place a greater emphasis on academic and classroom content/ language. MSHS will offer the individualized literacy course, Empower 3000, to the ELLs in grade levels 9-10. Data has also historically shown that ELLs struggle to attain college ready scores in ELA and pass the Global Regents exam. ENL teachers are working with the teachers in these departments to support content mastery while acquiring English. In history, for example, Tier I and II vocabulary words are integrated carefully thorough units to ensure constant exposure and usage. Writing scaffolds and templates are used more in that fall semester, and gradually taken away to ensure students can write structurally sound essay with little support. In ELA, teachers, are working to expose students to a variety of fiction an non-fiction texts. Strategies for understanding multiple choice and the writing tasks are also explicitly taught. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? We will not discontinue any of our ELL programs. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. ELLs are afforded equal access to all school programs. The curricular program students participate in are: 90-minute literacy and mathematics block, and collaborative team teaching. The extracurricular program students participate in are: after-school program, student clubs, sports teams (basketball, softball, baseball, soccer, track, swimming) and cheerleading/ step team. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. The instructional materials used by our ELL population are as follows: • English/Reading Comprehension: leveled novels of various genres, Teacher created units of study • Mathematics: Carnegie Learning Alebra, Geometry Program and Trigonometry Program, glossary of terms • Science: Glencoe - The Living Environment, Earth Science Teacher created units of study, glossary of terms • Global History: Glencoe - World History, McDopugal - The Americans, Teacher created units of study, glossary of terms • Economics: McDougal Little Economics, Concepts and Choices • Italian: Adesso • Dictionaries in Spanish and English Technology: • Every classroom has access to ipads, computers and a Promethean Activ Board with an Activ View Camera. • Various teachers also subscribe to a variety of interactive resources that support their content areas. For example, all teachers have access to Castle Learning, which provided extra practice for all Regents level classes. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Native language support is provided for ELLs in the classroom. When necessary interpretation services are available. ELLs are able to rely on other students as native language support. Our ENL teachers are fluent in English/Spanish bilingual. During state assessments, students receive materials in the native and target language including access to glossaries. Entering and Emerging students will have access to a personal electronic 5 Language translator to use in their content classes. As an additional resource, all students have access to Google Translate on the teacher's computer and/or IPAD. All ELLs at MSHS are aware that they are entitled to materials in their native language if available. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. 9  All required services and supports correspond to ELL ages and levels. Our ENL teachers are assigned to specific grade levels and participate in weekly grade level meetings to address individual needs of students. Within the weekly department and grade level meetings, the ENL teachers serve as advocates for the ELL students. When content teachers mention common issues and/or struggles with the ELLs, the ENL teachers provide additional support and strategies to content teachers when needed. Often times, the grade level teams decide to have the ENL teacher reach out the parent/guardian and establish a meeting time for the family and grade level. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? All of our students in our school are carefully programmed to meet their mandated minutes and required course load. ELL students with mandated counseling in their IEPs are also scheduled with the guidance counselor at the beginning of the year. In addition to academic support, our ELLs and their families have access to the programs the after school Beacon Program offers. They will be offering enrichment activities to our students and their families throughout the school year. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). Students transitioning to high school participate in The Metropolitan Soundview Summer Bridge Program. During this program, students have the opportunity to explore their new school, meet some of their new teachers, and meet fellow classmates. All 9 th grade students, including ELLs, participate in Peer Group Connections (PGC). The PGC program and its coordinators, support and ease students’ successful transition from middle to high school. The program taps into the power of high school juniors and seniors to create a nurturing environment for incoming freshmen. The MSHS college prep teachers and ENL coordinator will facilitate a workshop focusing on the pathway to college and career readiness to discuss the major differences between high school and middle school, the graduation expectations and answer any other questions parents may have. Sessions are held in English and Spanish, however, other language translation services are available for our parents when needed. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? The language elective offered to students at The Metropolitan Soundview High School is Italian and Spanish. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? Paste response to question here: We do not have a dual language program. Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? 1 - 2. All pedagogues at Metropolitan Soundview High School are certified in their content area of specialty. Our teachers will have the opportunity to participate in ENL workshops provided by the UFT and the BFSC. In addition, the ENL teacher, the 0  guidance counselor and secretary receive training in house. The ENL Coordinator will receive additional support on preparing the LAP and best practices for English language learners offered through the NYC Department of Education and Department of English Language Learners. In efforts to facilitate the implementation of appropriate instructional methodologies for the improvement of outcomes on assessments in our ELL population, teachers will be asked to participate in staff development sessions, inter-visitations and work with Generation Ready consultants. Our use of Professional Learning Communities allows for small teacher teams to conduct lesson studies, gap analysis of student work and engage in conversation revolving Webb's Depth of Knowledge and Bloom's Taxonomy. The following is a description of some topics to be discussed and implemented a. Common Core: Instructional shifts in common core literacy and mathematics standards. b. Designing Coherent Instruction: A teaching philosophy based on the premise that teachers should adapt instruction to meet the different needs of students in the classroom. Teachers are learning to meet students varying readiness levels, learning preferences and interests. c. UDL: A learning theory that has been developed by Rose and Meyer, that strives to ensure that the learning environment, including curriculum, assessment and teaching and learning tools promote learning and remove barriers to learning. d. UBD: A unit planning model that has been developed by Jay McTighe and Grant Wiggins which encourages authentic transfer of knowledge, and provides opportunities for students to explore and interpret new information and knowledge. 3. The support provided to staff as they transition ELLs from middle to high school include professional development in differentiation and working with a co-teacher and/or push in teacher. Staff also has common planning time which is to be used to meet and discuss the progress of ELLs on a weekly basis as a grade level team and within specific academic departments. 4. The school encourages inter-visitation among pedagogues during professional periods to learn different techniques and strategies in the delivery of instruction. The ENL coordinator will provide training for new staff on differentiating instruction for the ELL subgroups, to comply for the Jose P. requirement of 7.5 hours. The professional development learning cycles at the Metropolitan Soundview High School will focus on student centered learning through rigorous instruction. Within the various PD sessions, all teachers will engage in conversation about best practices for helping students, including ELLs, access the Common Core curriculum. Teacher teams will also be conducting lesson studies, gap analysis of student work, and engage in conversation about Webb's Depth of Knowledge and Bloom's Taxonomy. The Metropolitan Soundview High School encourages inter-visitation among pedagogues during professional periods to learn different techniques and strategies in the delivery of instruction. The ENL coordinator will provide training for new staff on differentiating instruction for the ELL subgroups, to comply for the Jose P. requirement of 7.5 hours. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. The Metropolitan Soundview High School provides PD sessions that focus best practices for co-teaching strategies and integrating language and content instruction for English language learners. When teachers engage in conversation about "designing coherent instruction", for example, they are engaging in conversation about how to facilitate the acquisition of English while building content knowledge. the ENL teachers also participate in PD dedicated to language acquisition in alignment with core content area instruction, including a focus on best practices for co-teaching strategies and integrating language and content instruction for English language learners. The ENL Department members also receive emails from Josie Levine, the UFT Chair: ENL/Bilingual Committee. Professional development is also offered through the UFT. Grade team meetings are an additional avenue to support all staff members when assisting ELLs as they transition from middle 1  to high school. Grade Team members acknowledge students doing well in their classes, and also raise any student concerns. In conjunction with the ENL teacher/department, the proper outreach can be made for the ENL student(s). Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? We recognize that many of our ELL parents find involvement with their child’s school to be frustrating. As such, our school is extremely dedicated to building relationships with parents that will increase student achievement. This joint effort requires extensive outreach and an ongoing mechanism through which parent-school communication can happen. At our school, that means an active Parent Coordinator who encourages increased ELL parental involvement in our Parent Organization. We will host an annual ELL Parent Meeting in which parents are informed of their children’s options and given the chance to ask questions and voice any concerns they may have. Parents are notified of the translation services available to them. All notifications sent to parents/guardians are written in the main home languages spoken at our school. During meetings translation/interpretation services are available and utilized if needed. We have several staff members who are able to speak the language spoken in some of the homes of our students. The Parent Coordinator will also work in tandem with the ENL team to schedule the one-on-one yearly meetings with each ENL family. All phone call attempts, meeting minutes, and signatures will be logged and store in the ENL binder. The College and Career Readiness teachers and guidance counselors also bring families to the school to discuss post secondary options for their children. Parents have access to informational sessions about financial aid, assistance with FAFSA, and other post secondary options. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Parents, including ELL parents, are invited to attend our Family Night in September. Parents have the chance to meet their child's teachers and visit the classrooms. The College and Career Readiness teachers and guidance counselors also bring families to the school to discuss post secondary options for their children. Parents have access to informational sessions about financial aid, assistance with FAFSA, and other post secondary options. The Parent Coordinator and guidance counselors are also working to increase parental involvement in the PTA. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Paste response here: 2 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Emarilix Lopez, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 3  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: Metropolitan Soundview HS School DBN: 12X521 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Emarilix Lopez Hilary Gellis Edwin Frias Lauren Ortiz Title Principal Assistant Principal Parent Coordinator ENL/Bilingual Teacher Parent Shannon Elliott Teacher/Subject Area Silvia Patalano-Ross Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach School Counselor Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 4  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 12X521 School Name: Metropolitan Soundview Superintendent: Michael Alcoff The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Edwin Frias Parent Coordinator yes Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. The data used to assess our school’s translation and oral interpretation needs includes the following ATS reports: RHLA, BIOS and RPOB. This information is used to create a list with the names of student, class, OSIS number and preferred language. The primary language information of each parent is reflected on the emergency card of each student. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. 5  Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral English Spanish Bengali Fulani, French, Arabic 376 278 3 9 55.7 41.19 .43 1.33 373 281 5 9 55.26 41.63 0.87 1.33 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. English and Spanish Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families Parent teacher conference announcement, November March Letters from school administration and announcements Throughout the year Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. Review home language data of students targeted for the meeting and reserve in house staff for languages spoken within the school. A reservation for interpretation services will be made for families whose home languages are: French, Arabic and Bengali Google translate is used for notices not found within the DOE Review home language data of students targeted for the meeting and reserve in house staff for languages spoken within the school. A reservation for interpretation services will be made for families whose home languages are: French, Arabic and Bengali 6  Family Engagement Nights and New Student Orientation, September Google translate is used for notices not found within the DOE Review home language data of students targeted for the meeting and reserve in house staff for languages spoken within the school. A reservation for interpretation services will be made for families whose home languages are: French, Arabic and Bengali May November, December May June Regent Testing Calendar, Google translate is used for notices not found within the DOE Review home language data of students targeted for the meeting and reserve in house staff for languages spoken within the school. A reservation for interpretation services will be made for families whose home languages are: French, Arabic and Bengali Google translate is used for notices not found within the DOE 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide MSHS conducts the following face-to-face meetings throughout the year: August A. Summer/Fall: New student orientation, Curriculum Night, Parent Teacher Conference, Family Engagement Night September November March B: Spring: Open House, New Student Orientation, Parent-Teacher Conference May interpretation service(s)? Review home language data of students targeted for the meeting and reserve in house staff for languages spoken within the school. A reservation for interpretation services will be made for families whose home languages are: French, Arabic and Bengali Review home language data of students targeted for the meeting and reserve in house staff for languages spoken within the school. A reservation for interpretation services 7  N/A N/A will be made for families whose home languages are: French, Arabic and Bengali N/A N/A N/A N/A 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. MSHS uses phone master and kinvolved. These programs communicate notices to parents in English and Spanish. Our school uses google translating services to provide families text notification in languages other than English and Spanish. MSHS will also contact the language and interpretation unit to communicate with families in the event of an emergency. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Our LAC will train all school staff on accessing interpretation services. Every staff member will receive informational cards on how to make arrangements for interpretation services. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) In the fall semester the Parents Bill of Rights and Parents' Guide to Language Access are disseminated at Family Engagement Night. the school secretary provides our families with accessing interpretation services should they be needed and/or upon request. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? The school will gather parent feedback on services via the parent survey and through PTA meetings. 8 
