2018-19 SCHOOL COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (SCEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 07X522 School Name: BRONX DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION ACADEMY Principal: JOYCE PULPHUS 2018-19 SCEP-FL 1  School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) Section 4: SCEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 SCEP-FL 2  School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information Bronx Design & Construction Academy 07X522 320700011522 9-12 School Number (DBN): 333 E. 151 st Street, Bronx, NY 10451 718-402-7690 718-402-4216 Phone Number: Juliany Gonzalez Fax: jgonzalez16@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Geographical District: 07 Superintendent’s Office Address: Email Address: Joyce Pulphus Tamara Wallace Monica Doyley Francisco Hicks MarcielaJohnson Patricia Cobb Barbara Abreu n/a District Information Michael Alcoff Superintendent: malcoff@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718-935-3074 Phone Number: 718-741-7098 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) 2018-19 SCEP-FL 3  Bronx FSC: Executive Director’s Office Address: Jose Ruiz Executive Director: 1 Fordham Plaza, Bronx NY, 10458 jruiz22@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 718-828-5643 Phone Number: 718-741-7098 Fax: 2018-19 SCEP-FL 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the SCEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Joyce Pulphus Tamara Wallace Monica Doyley JulianyGonzalez MarcielaJohnson Patricia Cobb Barbara Abreu Francisco Hicks *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/Elected UFT 2018-19 SCEP-FL 5  Name Norman Rice Natasha Ramsammy BebeAhmed Monique Kemp Jennifer Kim Tana-Li Rivera Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Member/Elected Parent Member/Elected Parent Member/Student Member/Student Member/ CBO Member/ DC37 Member/ Elected UFT Member/ Elected UFT Member/ Elected UFT Member/ Elected Parent Member/ 2018-19 SCEP-FL 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the School Comprehensive Educational Plan The School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) is a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. The process of developing and implementing the SCEP is aligned to the Framework for Great Schools. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding SCEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department has established programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students supports to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and SCEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint for continuous improvement that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to increase student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 7  In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five (5) goals and action plans that align with the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. Accountability Tools and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is informed by the New York State Education Department’s (NYSED) Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) Tenets, the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Rubric, School Quality Guide and other quantitative and qualitative data tools. NYSED’s Six DTSDE Tenets To strengthen the existing system, the NYSED has developed a tool that captures the best practices from each of the current tools called the Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness. This new tool encompasses multiple instruments such as interviews, classroom observations and surveys. The protocol will begin with a clear and cogent statement of the optimal conditions of an effective school and the instruments comprising the protocol will measure how close or far away a particular school is to the optimal conditions identified. Once reviewed, the school and district will create a strategic plan to address the areas in need of improvement. All current Priority and Focus Schools and Focus Districts must use the tool; districts that are required to submit District Comprehensive Improvement Plans and Comprehensive Educational Plans also will use the tool. The DTSDE protocol includes a rubric, which identifies clear and coherent expectations of the optimal conditions of an effective school and school district across the following six tenets:  Tenet 1: District Leadership and Capacity  Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions  Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support  Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions  Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health, and  Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement 2018-19 SCEP-FL 8  NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The 2017-18 Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) I. II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Structures for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the SCEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the SCEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. Next Steps for SCEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 9   Step 3: In Part 1A of the Section 5: Needs Assessment indicate the Statement of Practice (SOP) from the DTSDE Tenets that will be addressed in the action plan. Schools that received an Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) School Review should use the recommendations from the review to select their SOPs. Schools that did not undergo an IIT review should select SOPs informed by the major findings/recommendations from your most recent Quality Review (QR) or Central-led Review (CLR), and other qualitative and quantitative data.  Step 4: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 5: Build consensus around activities, strategies and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 6: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 7: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 10  1. What is your school’s mission statement? Section 4: SCEP Overview Founded in 2011, Bronx Design and Construction Academy is a public high school that offers a rigorous four-year Career and Technical Education (CTE) in architecture/pre-engineering and construction trades. By offering a rigorous integrated instruction, Bronx Design students are prepared for direct entry into the competitive construction trades and post-secondary education. Bronx Design graduates are prepared to make assured life choices and become powerful agents of change in the community at large. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. Bronx Design students have the opportunity to either study architecture/pre-engineering or one of the four building trades: plumbing, carpentry, electrical or HVAC (heating, ventilation and air-conditioning). Students who enter through the building trades program will begin their CTE experience by engaging in CTE survey course. This course allows students to rotate among the four building trades, begin their work of reading and drafting blueprints, and begin their NCCER Core training. At the end of grade 9, students select which building trade program they wish to engage in for grades 10 through 12. Students who apply to our architecture/pre-engineering program will begin their architecture curriculum in the 9th grade with Manual Drafting. In the 10th grade, students study Computer Drafting, followed by 3D Computer Drafting in grade 11 and Revit in grade 12. Throughout the courses, students are encouraged to test their skills by participating in annual Skills USA competitions. Bronx Design is committed to ensuring all students are college and career ready. As such, students are exposed to a rigorous curriculum in all core subjects. We use Engage NY curricula for math, and Collections curriculum for our core English classes. We've partnered with Elevate to support students in developing strong study habits within the history content area. Additionally, we utilize Castle Learning, an online program, to provide targeted support in Regents preparation. Our college and career center provides students resources to further their college and career interests within their chosen CTE fields. Throughout their Bronx Design experience, students engage in target internships, work-based learning programs, and college readiness programs such as College Now. To ensure all students have exposure to college, annual college trips throughout the state and out-of-state are arranged for students in grades 9 through 12. To support the social-emotional development of students, we offer a yearlong advisory program for our 9th graders to support their transition to high school. All students in grades 9 through 12 are assigned a Single Shepherd guidance counselor/social worker, who follows them throughout their high school career. We have three academic guidance counselors who are charged in the task of providing ongoing academic counseling, ensuring students are aware of their progress towards graduation, and empowering students to take accountability for their own learning. Additional Partnerships include AP for All, Algebra for All, College Access for All. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 11  In consideration of the trades we offer (Plumbing, Electrical, Architecture, Carpentry, and HVAC), our male population is much larger than our female population (80% and 20% respectively). We are diligent in recruiting female role models within the design and construction industry, and offering programs and opportunities to our female students to ensure they feel integrated and part of our community at large. Such initiatives include N.E.W. Program (Non-Traditional Employment for Women), Women’s Day celebrations (conference and luncheon), female student clubs, and increased PSAL campus sports teams (Flag Football, Basketball, Volleyball). Additionally, with a focus to prepare all students for college and career readiness, we seek to provide students with Special Needs the least restrictive learning environment. For example, a student who enters Bronx Design as a 9th grader coming from 12:1:1 placement in middle school will transition into a 15:1 class setting; with proper supports and frequent assessments, ideally, that student will be prepared to enter at least two ICT classes during year 2, and have a full ICT program by year 3. Providing services to our ENL students (20% of student population) consist of co-teaching classrooms that include a content teacher and an ENL teacher in classes of English and Social Studies, and alone classes for our Entering and Emerging students. We also provide advisory and after school programs aimed at supporting our ENL students by exposing them to our Bronx and New York City communities, as wella s increase college awareness. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. We have made the most strides in Strong Family-Community. During SY 2017, we held multiple parent events such monthly Classroom visits, where parents had an opportunity to shadow their child and visit their classes for the day; participation in our First Friday events during student lunch times; cultural festivals to celebrate the diversity of our students; Health Awareness workshops; and personalized Financial Aid support. The parental feedback provided in the Environmental Survey was positive overall, and parents have acknowledged their satisfaction with the reception they receive when visiting the school. We are developing a strong active Parent Association Board, which will support school wide goal setting for this school year as we increase our partnerships with the community, supported by a new parent coordinator. We have also made strides in improving our student programming to ensure all students receive appropriate courses towards graduation, ENL and IEP services, and individual student goals. This work will continue to build this school year as closer monitoring of guidance intervention with all students will increase. With access to grade specific Progress to Graduation trackers, students will be able to speak to their own progress in earning either a Regents diploma or an Advanced Regents diploma. Our instructional focus for the year is grounded in our two focus areas: Increasing Student Engagement, and Improving School Culture. As such, if teachers design rigorous tasks that are explicitly aligned to daily learning targets, responsive to ongoing formative assessment data, and provide students with actionable feedback, then students will know what is expected of them in class, be able to speak to their own learning and development, and become more accountable for their progress towards graduation and college and career readiness. To support improving school culture, we will introduce PBIS (Positive Behavior Intervention and Supports) this school year to support students in channeling appropriate behaviors and attitudes at school, and building school pride. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 12  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 07X522 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 09,10,11,12 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 504 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 32 12 8 5 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 24 28 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 83.0% % Attendance Rate 82.3% % Reduced Lunch 17.3% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 1.0% 67.9% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 1.6% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 1.9 0% 9% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation 67% 48% 50.7% 0.7% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No No Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups - Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A NO N/A N/A NO Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A NO N/A N/A NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient N/A YES N/A NO No N/A 112 132 30 75.6% 1.0% 28.0% 28.2% 0.8% 1.6% 4 27% 5.1 N/A N/A 68% 57% 61.5% N/A N/A No Yes N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A NO N/A N/A N/A N/A NO YES N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 SCEP-FL 13  Economically Disadvantaged YES ALL STUDENTS YES 2018-19 SCEP-FL 14  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 3 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 3.2 The school leader ensures and supports the quality implementation of a systematic plan of rigorous and coherent curricula appropriately aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS) that is monitored and adapted to meet the needs of students. Teachers develop and ensure that unit and lesson plans used include data-driven instruction (DDI) protocols that are appropriately aligned to the CCLS and NYS content standards and address student achievement needs. The school leader and teachers have developed a comprehensive plan for teachers to partner within and across all grades and subjects to create interdisciplinary curricula targeting the arts, technology, and other enrichment opportunities. Teachers implement a comprehensive system for using formative and summative assessments for strategic short and long-range curriculum planning that involves student reflection, tracking of, and ownership of learning. 3.3 3.4 3.5 SOP(s) Addressed X x X Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Since opening in 2011, the school has run on a trimester schedule, with the intention for students to accumulate credits towards graduation faster, and provide ample time to engage in CTE coursework at a deeper level during their junior and senior years. However, this approach led to college preparatory courses (i.e. AP leveled courses, higher level content courses) presented to students as an option, thereby limiting the college readiness of many students. Since operating on a semester-based schedule, student programming has improved dramatically in the past year. Content and CTE coursework are treated with the same level of importance, thereby supporting the goal of students beginning college and career ready. While the graduation rates and college and career readiness index increased between the first and second graduation classes, as evidenced on the NYC School Quality Guide, there still remains a challenge in increasing regents pass rates. Additionally, our graduation rate has yet to exceed above 67% among the four graduating classes (4-year graduation rate), partly due to Regents pass rates within History and Science. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 15  Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, teachers will meaningfully integrate the use of Castle Learning into instruction to yield a 5% increase in the Regents participation and pass rates among students who have between 75 and 85% daily attendance rate, as measured by the end of the year REDS report. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 16  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Academic 1-on-1 counseling for all students at least four times a year. All students Sept 2018 - June 2019 Guidance Team + Single Shepherds Targeted intervention for overage/under-credited students. Training on how to use Renaissance 360 and Castle Learning online programs within the classroom: student use, reading data reports, using data to inform instruction. Monitor teacher use of Renaissance 360 and Castle Learning School-wide Periodic Reading and Math Assessments using Renaissance 360. All students Use of Castle Learning to create summative assessments for Regents ending courses Faculty and Staff September 2018 Faculty Sept 2018 - June 2019 Sept & Dec 2018, March & May 2019 Sept 2018 - June 2019 Administration Admin, Faculty Faculty After school programs: Regents preparation for January 2019 and June 2019 Regents All students Oct 2018 - June 2019 Admin, Guidance, Faculty Nov 2018 - Jan 2019 & April 2019 - June 2019 2018-19 SCEP-FL 17  ENL/Sped Sept 2018 - June 2019 Reading Intervention Program for ENL students and low-level readers Vertical alignment of writing strategies within content teams: All students Sept 2018 - Jan 2019 Admin, Faculty History: Document based essays and questions Science: Lab reports and short answer questions 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight.  Freshmen Orientation: Two sessions to take place at the beginning and end of August 2018; Principal and support staff  Grade-level parent meetings: Bi-Monthly; Guidance counselors and Single Shepherds  Grade-level credit guides: Distributed to parents at the start of the year, during Parent-Teacher Conferences, and inside the main office. The guides are color-coded to denote grade level. Teachers, Guidance counselors and Single Shepherds.  PupilPath training: Monthly parent calendars will indicate training days; support staff and parent coordinator Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc.  Hiring Needs: Parent Coordinator  Instructional Support/Coaching/Professional Development: Borough Field Support Center support, Elevate, Cambridge Education  After school programming: Tutoring and Homework help, Skills USA, College and Career Readiness, Regents Prep, Reading Intervention Skedula Saturday Regents Prep   Castle Learning online Regents prep   Renaissance 360 Online assessment program (Star Reading 360 and Star Math 360)  Rosetta Stone (English language)  Reading Horizons Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA P/F Set-aside 21st Century C4E 2018-19 SCEP-FL 18  Title I 1003(a) X Title III PTA Funded SIG Grant School Achievement Other Funding Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, 100% of Regents ending courses will use Castle Learning at least once a week in daily instruction as evidenced by Castle Learning usage reports. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Internal guidance tracker (student logs, google document, iLog)   Castle Learning Online usage reports  Data Reports provided by STAR 360 (school wide, individual classes)  January REDS reports Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 19  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 5 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 5.2 The school leader establishes overarching systems and understandings of how to support and sustain student social and emotional developmental health and academic success. 5.3 The school articulates and systematically promotes a vision for social and emotional developmental health that is aligned to a curriculum or program that provides learning experiences and a safe and healthy school environment for families, teachers, and students. 5.4 All school stakeholders work together to develop a common understanding of the importance of their contributions in creating a school community that is safe, conducive to learning, and fostering of a sense of ownership for providing social and emotional developmental health supports tied to the school’s vision. 5.5 The school leader and student support staff work together with teachers to establish structures to support the use of data to respond to student social and emotional developmental health needs. x x x SOP(s) Addressed Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? During the 207 - 2018 school year, there were a total of 250 Level 1 through 3 incidents reported into the Online Occurrence Reporting System (OORS). This led to 89 principal suspensions, and 21 superintendent suspensions. As indicated by OORS suspension data and our internal behavior log, the school needs a positive behavior system and a restorative justice program that will help support the structures of our social-emotional/youth development, while providing ongoing support to students at various grade levels. Additionally, planning more celebrations, while re-building school culture and understanding among all stakeholders will contribute to less infractions and strong social-emotional supports. Part 2 – Annual Goal 2018-19 SCEP-FL 20  Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools –Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, the school will implement a school-wide PBIS program and a conflict resolution team that will lead to a 30% reduction in Levels 1, 2, and 3 infractions, moving from 250 to 175, among students as measured by the Incident Level and Infraction Summary from OORS. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 21  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Develop an incentive/behavior honor level system to recognize positive behavior (school-wide PBIS). All Students Aug 2018 - Sept 2018 Admin, Dean, Faculty Periodic celebrations to identify students who have improved attendance, academic behaviors, and citizenship. Professional development on the implementation of restorative justice circles Faculty and Staff Sept 2018- June 2019 FSC, OSYD, 100 Schools Project, Single Shepherds Professional development on Therapeutic Crisis Intervention and De-Escalation techniques Frequent monitor of behaviors for students who have a history of school conflict, poor attendance, and low academic achievement. Periodic home visits to communicate progress reports to families. Sept 2018 – June 2019 Single Shepherds, Social Workers, Guidance Counselors At Risk Students (Tier 1) in grades 9 - 12, lowest 30% Quarterly academic advising Immediate conflict Resolution mediation when conflict arises. All students Weekly and bi-weekly counseling. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Sept 2018 – June 2019 Conflict Resolution teachers, Dean, Admin How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight.  Ongoing parent meetings (teacher, counselor, and student led)   School wide events to celebrate student achievement (Honor Roll Assembly one each semester). Student of the Month recognition 2018-19 SCEP-FL 22  Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc.  Pre-Service Professional Development for all staff members (2 days)  Restorative Justice PD to support Restorative circles in classroom settings  PBIS Incentives for School store  Personnel: Single Shepherd personnel (guidance counselors and social workers; 1 for every 120 students), Work-Based Learning Coordinator, Dean Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal.  By February 2019, there will be less than 100 Level 1, 2, 3 occurrences, as reported in OORS. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress.  OORS    Skedula Ancedotals Student Attendance (increase) Scholarship Reports (Term 1) Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 23  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 4 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 4.2 School and teacher leaders ensure that instructional practices and strategies are organized around annual, unit, and daily lesson plans that address all student goals and needs. 4.3 Teachers provide coherent, and appropriately aligned Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS)-based instruction that leads to multiple points of access for all students. 4.4 Teachers and students work together to implement a program/plan to create a learning environment that is responsive to students’ varied experiences and tailored to the strengths and needs of all students. SOP(s) Addressed x x 4.5 Teachers inform planning and foster student participation in their own learning process by using a variety of summative and formative data sources (e.g., screening, interim measures, and progress monitoring). Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. x 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Following a great change in faculty for the 2017 - 2018 school year, based on the 2017-2018 School Quality Guide, overall peer collaboration among teachers increased from 43% in SY 2016 to 77% in SY 2017. In SY 2017, seventy-six percent of teachers said they design instructional programs together, as compared to 39% in SY 2016. There was a 25% increase in the percent of teachers that said "they talk with on another about instruction," between SY 2016 and SY 2017. While teacher collaboration has improved, the response from students in regards to being challenged in their classes (43%), teachers asking difficult questions on tests (53%) or in class (44%) are areas for growth that can be supported by the Collaborative Teachers framework. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 24 By June 2019, the ELA team will utilized common writing rubrics in order to identify and assess student writing skills, resulting in a 1% increase among students in the 11th grade scoring 75 or higher on their ELA Regents. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 25  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Determine intended outcomes of writing skills students in grades 9 through 12 will learn by the end of the year. ELA teachers August 30 - Sept 1 ELA/ENL teachers, Admin Identify specific texts students in grades 9 through 12 will read to support vertical alignment of content, reading and writing skills. Administer periodic reading assessments to students using Renaissance Reading 360. All students Sept 2018 - June 2019 Admin + ELA teachers - Use data to revise assigned texts to students. - Use data to group students during daily instruction, and making specific learning goals. - Use data to inform instruction to ensure multiple entry points for students. Administer a writing diagnostic to assess student writing using English Writing Rubric. Weekly professional development targeted at student engagement, reviewing student work, and using data to inform teaching. Faculty Sept 2018 - June 2019 Admin + Content Teacher Facilitators Establish writing protocols within the humanities; reading and writing goals by grade level ELA and History teachers Sept 2018 - Nov 2018 Admin + Content Facilitators 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight.  Parent-teacher meetings (1-on-1 conferencing) regarding assessment data (in-house Reading data, writing skills), and inform ongoing support at home. Meetings to occur during open school nights (4), parent 2018-19 SCEP-FL 26  engagement time (Tuesdays), or pre-scheduled meetings arranged by Parent Coordinator, Single Shepherd, or support staff. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Saturday Planning sessions for content teams (Vertical alignment focus)  Pre-Service PD (2 days)   Renaissance 360  Class Sets of Assigned Texts  After school programs Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) X X Title I SWP Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century C4E School Achievement X Other Funding Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal.  By February 2019, all students (non-LTAs) will have a base-line reading level documented, and 11th graders will have sat for the ELA Regents at least once. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress.  Renaissance Reading 360 Data  Mock ELA Regents  Castle Learning  January ELA Regents data Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 27  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 2 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 2.2 The school leader ensures that the school community shares the Specific, Measurable, Ambitious, Results-oriented, and Timely (SMART) goals/mission and long-term vision inclusive of core values that address the priorities outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP). Leaders make strategic decisions to organize programmatic, human, and fiscal capital resources. 2.3 2.4 The school leader has a fully functional system in place aligned to the district's Annual Professional Performance Review (APPR) to conduct targeted and frequent observation and track progress of teacher practices based on student data and feedback. 2.5 Leaders effectively use evidence-based systems and structures to examine and improve critical individual and school-wide practices as defined in the SCEP (student achievement, curriculum and teacher practices; leadership development; community/family engagement; and student social and emotional developmental health). x x x x SOP(s) Addressed Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. As evidenced in the School Quality Guide from 2016 - 2017 and 2017 - 2018:  o Quality of Professional Development - As compared to SY 2016 where 22% of teachers agreed that overall, their professional development experiences this year have been sustained and coherently focused, rather than short-term and unrelated, SY 2017 reported 61% of teachers agreed. Additionally, an increase from 28% to 77% of teachers agreed or strongly agreed that overall, their professional development experiences this year have included opportunities to work productively with colleagues in their school. However, only 57% of teachers say "their professional development experiences this year have included enough time to think carefully about, try, and evaluate new ideas." Part 2 – Annual Goal 2018-19 SCEP-FL 28  Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART– Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, there will be an improvement in teacher satisfaction with quality professional development from 57% to 65% around the question of “my professional development experiences this year have included enough time to think carefully about, try, and evaluate new ideas,” by implementing a professional development plan that aligns to two school-wide initiatives: climate and student engagement. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 29  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Professional Development on protocols and school wide communication systems and expectations, best practices for communication, and expectations of support staff. Full staff August 2018 - Jan 2019 Admin, PD team Professional Development on question and discussion techniques, exchange of best practices, and strategies to enhance differentiation for students with disabilities and ENL students. Use of ADVANCE data to support teacher-led PDs, and provide next steps via weekly Principal Memos Faculty Sept 2018 - June 2019 Content Facilitators + Principal Conduct weekly Curriculum and Instruction (C & I) Team meetings to discuss progress within content teams and next steps. Faculty Sept 2018 - June 2019 Admin + Content Facilitators The Curriculum and Instruction Team support in planning Professional Development tied to school wide foci: Student Engagement and Climate Administer periodic surveys to faculty asking them to evaluate the quality of PD. Host school visits, and seek opportunities for teachers to visit other schools to observe instruction and best practices. Faculty Nov 2018, March 2019 Admin Sept 2018 - May 2019 Create an inter-visitation protocol for content teachers to visit each other. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 30  3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Monthly Classroom visits for parents to "shadow" their child and visit classes. The visits will be organized by the parent coordinator, and commence the second Friday of every month. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc.  Professional Development: After school training, New teacher PD, Off-site PD  Curriculum & Instruction Team meetings  Professional Learning texts  Peer Collaborative Teachers (2) Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) X X Title I SWP Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal.  By February 2019, during the mid-year teacher meetings, 100% of faculty will complete Profession Development alignment survey to inform administration of current satisfaction of weekly professional development. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress.  Google Survey (Form)  ADVANCE Data Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 31  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 6 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 6.2 The school leader ensures that regular communication with students and families fosters their high expectations for student academic achievement. 6.3 The school engages in effective planning and reciprocal communication with family and community stakeholders so that student strength and needs are identified and used to augment learning. 6.4 The school community partners with families and community agencies to promote and provide training across all areas (academic and social and emotional developmental health) to support student success. 6.5 The school shares data in a way that promotes dialogue among parents, students, and school community members centered on student learning and success and encourages and empowers families to understand and use data to advocate for appropriate support services for their children. x x x SOP(s) Addressed Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Communication between school and parent is consistent. Parents receive communication from the school via school mailings (all translated), email, automated calls, and personalized calls. Additionally, parents receive current and up to date information regarding their child’s academic progress via calls from advisors, in-person meetings and Pupil Path (Sept, Oct, Nov, Feb, March, May) Based on the 2017 School Quality Guide, twelve percent of our parents completed the annual survey during SY 2017. As such, we seek to increase parent engagement by hiring a Parent Coordinator, re-activating our Parent Association, and establishing in-person gatherings such as Town Halls and parent celebrations throughout the year. 48% of parents responded that they have been asked to volunteer time to support the school, and only 87% of parents agreed that they were invited to visit classrooms to observe instruction. Part 2 – Annual Goal 2018-19 SCEP-FL 32  Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, we will increase our parent involvement by developing opportunities to invite parents to the school to visit classrooms, attend school trips, view student work, and discuss student progress towards graduation, which will lead to a 30% increase (from 12% to 42%) in the number of parents who complete the Learning Environment survey. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 33  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Establish Classroom showcase days to invite parents to observe instruction. Parents Schedule two parent events a month, one to take place during the day, and one to occur in the evening. Parents Monthly: Oct 2018 - May 2019 Sept 2018 - June 2019 Teachers, Parent Coordinator Parent Association Board + Parent Coordinator Ensure all parent correspondence (i.e. Parent Newsletters, and monthly calendars) are translated to Spanish, mailed and emailed (where applicable) in a timely manner (at least two notices prior to an event). Parents Sept 2018 - June 2019 Admin + Parent Coordinator -Monthly calendars -Monthly newsletter Increase the number of parent participants attending each school organized parent event by sending postcards and special invitations to parents. Students + Parents Sept 2018 - June 2019 Parent Association Board + Parent Coordinator 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. N/A Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc.  Parent Teacher Conferences and Open House nights  Monthly PA organized events  Workshops  Parent celebrations   Postage Field Trips 2018-19 SCEP-FL 34  Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA X PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal.  By February 2019, 15% of parents would have engaged in at least one school event, not including Parent-Teacher conference. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress.  Attendance reports  Activity on Skedula (PupilPath)  NYC School Environment Survey Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 35  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Students are monitored by lowest third data, exam scores and attendance for AIS services. Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) ● Individual Reading plans with Reading Plus. ● Unique programs will be generated for these students to build a program that best addresses their needs. ● Office hours- tutoring services after and before school for targeted students ● Differentiated programming with attention to special classes for under-performing students Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) ● A combination of one-on-one interactions and small group instruction based on need. Mostly during the school day, with before and after school tutoring options. Afterschool program runs on Tuesdays, Wednesdays and Thursdays 3:00- 5:00pm, during Terms 1 and 2. ● After school tutoring in small groups. ● Programmed small classes for most at-risk readers. ● Collaborative Team Teaching model Frequent, high-value contact with parents: via telephone, email, and Skedula updates. ● Collaborative Team Teaching model ● Frequent High-value contact with parents: Teachers will call parents when they are at-risk of failing; problem solving conferences will be scheduled as needed; daily phone calls are made to students who are 2018-19 SCEP-FL 36  Mathematics Students are monitored by lowest third data, exam scores and attendance for AIS services. absent; parents will be contacted via email with regular updates on their students’ assignments, performance, and important upcoming events. Pupil Personnel Team meets weekly to discuss action plans for at-risk students Students are programmed for small group intervention classes during 9th period ● Office hours- tutoring services after and before school for targeted students ● Use of Khan Academy for Math tutoring After school, in small groups and during 9th period pull-out classes ● Small group instruction ● Programmed small classes for most at-risk readers. ● Collaborative Team Teaching model: throughout a lesson in class Frequent, high-value contact with parents: via telephone, email, and Skedula updates ● Differentiated programming with attention to special classes for under-performing students ● Collaborative Team Teaching model ● Frequent High-value contact with parents: Teachers will call parents when they are at-risk of failing; problem solving conferences will be scheduled as needed; daily phone calls are made to students who are 2018-19 SCEP-FL 37  Science Students are monitored by lowest third data, exam scores and attendance for AIS services. absent; parents will be contacted via email with regular updates on their students’ assignments, performance, and important upcoming events. Scaffolded6 course sequence pre-algebra and algebra courses for at risk students Pupil Personnel Team meets weekly to discuss action plans for at-risk students ● Students are programmed according to literacy levels and given small group instruction and one-on-one tutoring as needed. Office hours- tutoring services after and before school for targeted students During school, tutoring after school as needed. ● Small group instruction, one on one tutoring. Programmed small classes for most at-risk readers. ● Collaborative Team Teaching model: throughout a lesson in class ● Differentiated programming with attention to special classes for under-performing students Frequent, high-value contact with parents: via telephone, email, and Skedula updates ● Collaborative Team Teaching model ● Use of Blended Learning ● Frequent High-value contact with parents: Teachers will call parents when they are at-risk of failing; problem solving conferences 2018-19 SCEP-FL 38  Social Studies Students are monitored by lowest third data, exam scores and attendance for AIS services. will be scheduled as needed; daily phone calls are made to students who are absent; parents will be contacted via email with regular updates on their students’ assignments, performance, and important upcoming events. Pupil Personnel Team meets weekly to discuss action plans for at-risk students ● Students are programmed according to literacy levels and given small group instruction and one-on-one tutoring as needed. Office hours- tutoring services after and before school for targeted students ● Differentiated programming with attention to special classes for under-performing students ● Collaborative Team Teaching model ● Frequent High-value contact with parents: Teachers will call parents when they are at-risk of failing; problem solving conferences will be scheduled as needed; daily phone calls are made to students who are During school, tutoring after school as needed. ● Small group instruction, one on one tutoring Programmed small classes for most at-risk readers. ● Collaborative Team Teaching model: throughout a lesson in class Frequent, high-value contact with parents: via telephone, email, and Skedula updates 2018-19 SCEP-FL 39  At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Students are monitored by lowest third data, attendance and reports to teachers through our in-house referral process. absent; parents will be contacted via email with regular updates on their students’ assignments, performance, and important upcoming events. Pupil Personnel Team meets weekly to discuss action plans for at-risk students Counseling Mandated counseling by School Social Workers o Academic Counseling by Advisors and School Guidance Counselors o External Referrals from ESSH Services and Partnership with Children ● Advisory: Academic support via advisory and one-on-one parent/guidance meetings. ● Grade Summits: Information gathering and sharing with staff around high risk students and their needs ● PPT: Regular pupil personnel team meetings to plan for at-risk students. ● Student run peer mediation program ● School Social Worker ● School Guidance Counselors Most services will be provided during the day, some before and after school, and a vast minority at night, off-site ● Advisory: small groups ● CBO Advocate Counselors 2018-19 SCEP-FL 40  2018-19 SCEP-FL 41  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 63 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population.  After school for credit recovery and accumulation, academic support, a place to complete homework in a safe space, or engage in a extra-curricular activity.  Progress monitoring by Social Workers and Single Shepherds via daily or weekly check-ins.   School uniform (pants and shirt) and hygiene essentials. School supplies (backpack, pens, pencils, notebooks, calculators). Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 42  N/A 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. N/A 2018-19 SCEP-FL 43  Section 8: Title I Program Information Directions:  All schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. Bronx Design & Construction Academy holds open houses for interested candidates each year, to ensure students and families committed to the construction trades are given the opportunity to see our school before applying. We clearly outline our teaching expectations, the latitude given, the high expectations we have, and the PD plan they will be opting into. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the strategies and activities for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, staff, and paraprofessionals that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). Bronx Design & Construction Academy offers teachers a high degree of independence with very high expectations for final student outcomes. Teachers also receive frequent feedback. Our philosophy and budget shows that we invest our money in small class size, which teachers also appreciate. Teachers at BDCA set their own goals based off of the Danielson Rubric. We then compare our observations and areas of growth for the individual teacher and collaboratively develop a personal plan of action for each teacher. All staff have a master’s degree in their respective subjects or are working toward it through an alternative certification program. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program 2018-19 SCEP-FL 44  Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/information, early intervention services, etc.). Not applicable. 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction.  Ongoing classroom observations, followed by immediate in-person feedback, and written feedback.  Professional Development needs survey   Non-evaluative classroom visits Intervisitations 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds enables, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (SCEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Column B Section Reference(s) 5a, 5b, 5c, 5d, 5e 5b Title I Part A (Basic) Title I School Improvement 1003(a) Federal Federal 491,625.00 16,979 x x 2018-19 SCEP-FL 45 Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funds Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 81,186.00 0 12,366.00 0 4,863,785.00 x N/A x N/A x 5b, 5c N/A 5c, 5d N/A 5a, 5b, 5c, 5d, 5e 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I School Improvement 1003(a): To support implementation of school improvement activities identified through the Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) reviews or a school review with district oversight and included in the DCIP/SCEP.  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: To support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs.  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not 2018-19 SCEP-FL 46  available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan.  Title I Priority and Focus School Parent Engagement Set-aside: Additional set-aside is to enable greater and  more meaningful parent participation in the education of their children. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.  Grant funds awarded via a competitive process, including Title I 1003(g) SIG funds: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 47  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Bronx Design & Construction Academy agrees to implement the following statutory requirements: The school will put into operation programs, activities and procedures for the involvement of parents, consistent with section 1118 of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA). Those programs, activities and procedures will be planned and operated with meaningful consultation with parents of participating children. The school will ensure that the required school-level parental involvement policy meets the requirements of section 1118(b) of the ESSA, and includes, as a component, a school-parent compact consistent with section 1118(d) of the ESSA. The school will incorporate this parental involvement policy into its school improvement plan. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students In carrying out the Title I, Part A parental involvement requirements, to the extent practicable, the school will provide full opportunities for the participation of parents with limited English proficiency, parents with disabilities, and parents of migratory children, including providing information and school reports required under section 1111 of the ESSA in an understandable and uniform format and, including alternative formats upon request, and, to the extent practicable, in a language parents understand. The school will involve the parents of children served in Title I, Part A programs in decisions about how the 1 percent of Title I, Part A funds reserved for parental involvement is spent. Parental Involvement and School Quality 2018-19 SCEP-FL 48  The school will be governed by the following statutory definition of parental involvement, and will carry out programs, activities and procedures in accordance with this definition: Parental involvement means the participation of parents in regular, two-way, and meaningful communication involving student academic learning and other school activities, including ensuring— o that parents play an integral role in assisting their child’s learning; o that parents are encouraged to be actively involved in their child’s education at school; o that parents are full partners in their child’s education and are included, as appropriate, in decision-making and on advisory committees to assist in the education of their child; the carrying out of other activities, such as those described in section 1118 of the ESSA. o that the school will inform parents and parental organizations of the purpose and existence of the Parental Information and Resource Center in the State. This policy will be reviewed in May of every school year. The PA will evaluate the policy and decide on changes, revision will be finalized by the end of June for implementation of the subsequent school year. 1. Bronx Design & Construction Academy will take the following actions to involve parents in the joint development of its school parental involvement plan under section 1112 of the ESSA: Parent Association meetings are held on an ongoing basis. In addition, an executive committee of the Parent Association meets frequently to discuss all school matters. This executive committee serves as the School Leadership Team for Bronx Design & Construction Academy, and includes parent, student, staff and CBO representation. Bronx Design & Construction Academy will take the following actions to involve parents in the process of school review and improvement under section 1116 of the ESSA: ● Active SLT that reviews student performance data and assesses needs and direction of school. Bronx Design & Construction Academy will take the following actions to conduct, with the involvement of parents, an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parental involvement policy in improving school quality. The evaluation will include identifying barriers to greater participation by parents in parental involvement activities (with particular attention to parents who are economically disadvantaged, are disabled, have limited English proficiency, have limited literacy, or are of any racial or ethnic minority background). The school will use the findings of the evaluation about its parental involvement policy and activities to design strategies for more effective parental involvement, and to revise, if necessary (and with the involvement of parents) its parental involvement policies. ● SLT will at regular meetings discuss goals and objectives of the school, progress toward said goals using data on student outcomes. In building deeper and strong parent involvement and relationships, Bronx Design & Construction Academy will: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement 2018-19 SCEP-FL 49  o involve parents in the development of training for teachers, principals, and other educators to improve the effectiveness of that training; o provide necessary literacy training for parents from Title I, Part A funds, if the school district has exhausted all other reasonably available sources of funding for that training; o immediately notifying parents of absences and tardiness of students, and calling Problem Solving Conferences as needed to address these concerns o pay reasonable and necessary expenses associated with parental involvement activities, including transportation and child care costs, to enable parents to participate in school-related meetings and training sessions; o train parents to enhance the involvement of other parents; o in order to maximize parental involvement and participation in their children’s education, arrange school meetings at a variety of times, or conducting in-home conferences between teachers or other educators, who work directly with participating children, with parents who are unable to attend those conferences at school; o adopt and implement model approaches to improving parental involvement; o develop appropriate roles for community-based organizations and businesses, including faith-based organizations, in parental involvement activities; and o provide other reasonable support for parental involvement activities under section 1118 as parents may request. School-Parent Compact (SPC) The Bronx Design and Construction Academy, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. The Bronx Design & Construction Academy, and the parents of the students participating in activities, services, and programs funded by Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) (participating children), agree that this compact outlines how the parents, the entire school staff, and the students will share the responsibility for improved student academic achievement and the means by which the school and parents will build and develop a partnership that will help children achieve the State’s high standards. This school-parent compact is in effect during school year 2015-2016. School Responsibilities I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum The Bronx Design & Construction Academy School will: 2018-19 SCEP-FL 50  o Provide high-quality instruction in a supportive and effective learning environment that enables all students to exceed the State’s student academic achievement standards and matriculate into college or pursue career goals. o Communicate regularly with parents regarding student achievements, progress and concerns through Skedula, the Advisor and phone calls home. o Inform parents of students’ academic progress on a regular basis by:  Disseminating progress reports in October, January and May  House Orientation Sessions  Holding parent-teacher conferences in September, November, March and May.  Providing an annual report of students’ progress toward graduation. o Involve and inform parents in student work and achievement through several school-wide evening events (E.g., Internship Presentations, Expos, Awards Assemblies and Grade-wide Celebrations). o Inform parents of school-wide events, parent events, and PA meetings through email, phone calls, newsletters, and personal outreach. All communication from the school will be in an understandable and uniform format, including alternative languages and formats, to the extent possible. o Involve parents in the planning, review, and improvement of school-wide programs. o Hold an annual parent meeting to inform and explain the school’s participation in Title I, Part A program. The meeting will include information about the requirements for participation in the Title I, Part A program. The school will convene the meeting at a convenient time, and will offer a flexible number of additional parental involvement meetings to include as many parents as possible. o Provide parents with reasonable access to staff through email, phone and face-to-face meetings. o Offer parents opportunities to volunteer, observe, and participate in classroom activities. o Promote a culture of respect among students and staff by upholding norms for appropriate behavior and dress. o Demonstrate an appreciation for diversity of students and staff with respect to race, gender, ethnicity, sexual orientation and religion. o Form parent partnerships to increase student attendance I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships  Bronx Design & Construction Academy will build the schools’ and parent’s capacity for strong parental involvement, in order to ensure effective involvement of parents and to support a partnership with the 2018-19 SCEP-FL 51  parents, and the community to improve student academic achievement, through the following activities specifically described below: · The school will provide assistance to parents of children served by the school, as appropriate, in understanding topics such as the following, by undertaking the actions described in this paragraph – o the State’s academic content standards o the State’s student academic achievement standards o the State and local academic assessments including alternate assessments, the requirements of Part A, how to monitor their child’s progress, and how to work with educators. · The school will provide materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their children’s academic achievement, such as literacy training, and using technology, as appropriate, to foster parental involvement, by: o Parenting workshops via our CBO- ESSH o Frequent outreach and interaction between students and advisors · The school will, with the assistance of its parents, educate its teachers, pupil services personnel, principal and other staff, in how to reach out to, communicate with, and work with parents as equal partners, in the value and utility of contributions of parents, and in how to implement and coordinate parent programs and build ties between parents and schools, by: o Organizing active parent outreach via Bronx Design & Construction Academy parent coordinator and staff · Active SLT programming and outreach · Active programming and outreach by parent coordinator · The school will take the following actions to ensure that information related to the school and parent- programs, meetings, and other activities, is sent to the parents of participating children in an understandable and uniform format, including alternative formats upon request, and, to the extent practicable, in a language the parents can understand: o Regular parent meetings 2018-19 SCEP-FL 52  o Regular SLT meetings o Letters and newsletters sent home to parents I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff  Organizing clear communication between advisors, students and parents through clear programming and protocols including training for staff Guidance Counselors: I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents (1) Will provide parents resources on additional transition programs to support their child in earning a high school diploma. (2) Will maintain ongoing communication (via telephone and in-person conferences, and letters) regarding their child's academic progress. Single Shepherds: (1) Will support students and families in conflict resolution and additional social emotional supports when needed. (2) Will maintain consistent communication with parents, students and teachers. Family Worker: (1) Will provide clear communication with families of students with disabilities regarding IEP meetings, and program updates. Social Workers: (1) Will connect parents to outside mental health resources when needed. (2) Will inform parents of student progress and concerns regarding social-emotional development. Parent Coordinator: (1) Will organize workshops based on parent needs. The school has created a parent resource room for parents where they may have access to computers, a printer and copier, as well as parenting resources. Parent Responsibilities Parents will: II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities 2018-19 SCEP-FL 53  o Ensure his/her child’s timeliness and daily attendance. o Inform the school of any planned absences, tardiness, or changes in phone number and address. o Ensure his/her child comes to school prepared with the materials necessary to learn. o Check in with his/her child regularly regarding assignments and preparation for exams. o Understand and promote the development of knowledge and skills necessary to graduate from high school and matriculate into college. o Participate in and communicate with the school by email, phone, or face-to-face meetings regarding decisions related to his/her child’s education. o Encourage his/her child’s participation in enrichment programs. o Acknowledge and respond promptly and accordingly to all mail, email, and phone notices from the school by promptly reading or listening to all school communication. Students will: III. Student Responsibilities  Attend school daily, on time.  Complete all assignments.  Engage in positive behavior and meet school wide expectations.  Confer with school counselors and/or teachers when conflict arises before reacting.  Experience at least 1 internship during their high school experience.  Engage in academic conferences regarding their progress towards graduation.  Take responsibility for their learning, and seek academic support when needed. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 54  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): K 6 1 7 2 8 3 9 4 10 5 11 12 2018-19 SCEP-FL 55  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: After reviewing the 2015 & 2016 NYSESLAT data, Regents and 8th grade data, any English Language Learner, in grades 9-11, who scored between "Entering" and "Transitioning" levels of the NYSESLAT and/or failed a NYS exam are encouraged to take part in our after school program for ELLs to help build fluency. Additionally, our after-school activities help our ELLs develop social skills, improve academic performance, and help them build strong supportive relationships with adults other than their parents. Our ELLs need guidance to grow into productive adulthood and after school programs and activities keep our students busy between 2:30 - 4:30 PM Wednesday through Friday. Second, our after school program can provide extra time for career exploration, skill development, service learning and internships to prepare them for college and work. Later, they are in small groups working on argumentative writing and text-based responses. Time: 2:30 - 4:20 PM Days: Wednesday - Friday Dates: October 2018 - June 2019 Total Number of Sessions: 100 Language of Instruction: English Provider: Certified ESL Teacher Number of Students: 37 Materials: Rosetta Stone, Read 180 (or similar reading program), Castle Learning, journals, recorders. Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: The content, performance and language demands of the CCLS and aligned assessments will augment the challenges for English Language Learners. Teacher preparation and professional 2018-19 SCEP-FL 56  Part C: Professional Development development programs will need to be designed to support the deeper content, performance and language demands expected of students. Consequently, the content, quality and delivery of professional learning opportunities will need to support teachers’ deeper understanding of content and mastery of instructional strategies that assist ELL students’ attainment of more rigorous standards. Our ELLs are in grades 9-12 and, therefore, the entire instructional staff at Bronx Design will address their specific needs. Dates: September 2018 - June 2019 Providers: Field Support Staff: 4 - ELA Teachers 2- ESL Certified Teachers (Title III Providers) 1- Foreign Language Teacher (Title III Provider) 4 - Math Teachers 4 - Social Studies Teachers 4 - Science Teachers 10 - CTE Teachers When: Conference Days Suggested topics to be covered: October: ELL Data and the Regents Exams November: Differentiation for ELLs at all levels December: Assessing ENL students progress through formative assessments January: Poverty and the Effects on English Language Learners January: Understanding Writing Contexts for English Language Learners Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: Parents of ELLs face daunting barriers as they try to become informed or involved in their child's school. These barriers, which include the inability to understand English, unfamiliarity with the school system, and differences in cultural norms and cultural capital, can limit parents’ communication and school participation. In order to assist our ELL parents Bronx Design and Construction will partner with Field Support Center to ensure resources are shared, and provide English language class for parents through Rosetta Stone. Parents are notified via letter/phone by our parent coordinator of any upcoming workshops. Translation in Spanish is provided for parents by school staff. Days and Times: Bi-monthly; Wednesdays 4:30 - 6:30 PM Parent Coordinator: TBD ELL Coordinator: Erika Tymann Topics: TBD 2018-19 SCEP-FL 57 Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. 10% of Salary of the second ENL teacher Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits) $12,366  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL $12,366 2018-19 SCEP-FL 58  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 07 School Name Bronx Design & Construction Academy Borough Bronx School Number 522 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Joyce Pulphus Coach ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Jennifer Kim, ESL Teacher/Subject Area Sharon Matthews, SPED Teacher/Subject Area Ramon Payano, Math Related-Service Provider Superintendent Carron Staple Assistant Principal Jessy Simon Coach School Counselor Jorge Garcia Parent Monica Doyley Parent Coordinator Zuri Placencia Field Support Center Staff Member Other (Name and Title) C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 1 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 3 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] D. Student Demographics 2018-19 SCEP-FL 59  Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 537 Total number of ELLs 116 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 21.60% Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 1 2 3 4 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? BDCA uses various formative and curriuclum-embedded assessments to guide instructional planning for our ELLs. These include warm up/do nows, think-pair-share, exit tickets, and strategic questionings. In addition, the NYSESLAT, NYSITELL, Reading Plus, final, and midterm exams are used to assess the literacy skills of our ELLs. The data from these tests determine programming needs. We will use the State ELL test scores and Regents exam data to determine how to program ELLs' classes for next year. The new NYC ELA asssessment data helps in determining the strengths and weaknesses of our students' literacy skills, particularly in persuasive and counter-argument writing. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 60  2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? Staff members collaborate during PD time and have the ability to communicate with each other through online platforms such as email and Google office. In the future, the school plans to implement an inquiry team. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? At the present time, we use the NYSESLAT data and have used ELA periodic assessment to determine the literacy progress for our ELL students. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? The ENL team meets with the support of the admin to analyze data and plan with other teachers on how to drive instruction for differentiation and better language support. Currently, the ENL team meets once a week and for the future academic year 2017-2018, ENL team will be sharing targeted resources with content teachers to improve ELL support. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] N/A 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. Data information from NYSESLAT, Regents, EDAT, periodic assessment have been used to analyze the current level and implement actions to support the language development of our ELL population. The data patterns reveals that the majority of our students need the most support in developing listening, reading, and writing skills. These outcomes are used as indicators by teachers in scaffolding their lessons. The ELL Coordinator also attends monthly district meetings with Field Support Center (FSC) to receive monthly compliance information and further discuss and turnkey how to support our ELL population. For the coming year, we will use the same source to assess programming for ELL minutes. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? Time during professional development is given for faculty members to discuss findings and how to implement activities to support ELL students. For the coming academic year, targeted PDs will be implemented to continue discussion on ELL strategies working with students with different language levels. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. ENL instruction is given in departmentalized, heterogeneous classrooms with a licensed ENL teacher. Students that are beginning, intermediate, or advanced ENL students and need extra practice are grouped together. A stand alone ENL class if offered for extra language support. b. TBE program. If applicable. N/A c. DL program. If applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 61  N/A 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? Our ENL certified teachers provide instructions for language support in stand alone class and pushing into content area classes. Our program looks at the proficiency levels of our ELL students and program students to receive minutes they need to improve their literacy levels across content. We also receive support from the Field Support office as they send out weekly information to the Principal who, in turn, let us know which students are in need of instructional minutes. We also look at information extracted from ATS to see which students require ELL minutes. For the coming year, we will proactively be looking at student transcript and schedule to ensure students are given the minutes and courses needed. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. Students have three distinct points in their lessons: Launch, Investigation, and Synthesis. The focus in supporting our students is literacy and content comprehension. Access to computers, think-pair-share, group work, exit ticket, on-going and informal assessment, independent study, and sustained reading are few strategies used to deliver core content. Our ENL teachers collaborate with content teachers to provide appropriate guidance and scaffolding to ensure the fostering of language development that is aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? N/A - All assessments are conducted in English. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status The use of differentiated materials, class settings, and online resources enable us to differentiate instruction for each specific type of English Language Learner within each classroom. ENL teachers also work with content teachers to apply different types of instruction for various subgroups. For example, the ENL teacher will pull out different ELL subgroups during class to provide extra focus on language development, if needed. The use of technology, visual aid, and audio (closed captioning/text) is encouraged. Bilingual dictionaries, glossaries, appropriate leveled texts, support from guidance counselors, Spanish speaking paraprofessionals and staff members are extra support for our ELL subgroups. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? Graphic organizers, alternative assessments, homework options, KWL charts, learning contracts, mini white boards, reflections/response, think-pair-share, jigsaw, sticky note graph, anchor activities, four sides, reading buddies, are some ways teachers support ELL-SWDs. In addition, teachers collaborate with SPED teachers and apply variety of blended learning, scaffolded texts, homo-and heterogeneous grouping, and any mandates on the child's IEP. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? The Special Education Implementation Team (SIT) meet with teachers to discuss the academic and emotional progress for ELL-SWDs. Teachers review students IEP goals and review SESIS, communication with guidance counselors are on-going 2018-19 SCEP-FL 62  throughout the year, and teachers keep an open line of communication with the student and home to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals. Learning strategies are also implemented to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals. This includes use of technology, testing accommodations, and visual aids. These implementations ensure that ELL-SWDs are provided the opportunity and the academic environment to succeed. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. The targeted intervention programs for ELL students in mathematics and other core content areas are the same as for all other students, including mandated and voluntary tutoring. Math help is available in Spanish for our students who are having difficulty with mathematics vocabulary via push-in support from our bilingual paraprofessionals. Use of glossaries, dictionary, linguistic pairing/grouping, use of online resources, and extra tutoring is also offered. Students have the option to take part in after school tutoring through GET, Algebra for all, Saturday program, Regents prep, and receive academic counseling through staff. For the coming year, our goal is to have guidance counselors meet with students to discuss transcripts and have more college trips to support our students in excelling in all content areas. Some of our ELLs are programmed in ICT modeled classes. Push-in, pull-out, and self contained are models that also support our ELLs in our programming. ENL certified teachers push into content classes and, if needed, discuss with the content teachers to pull-out ELL students for targeted language support for that subject. Teaching strategies such as use of graphic organizers, strategic grouping/pairing, modeling think-aloud, chunking, bridging, use of visual aids, and guided reading questions are all implemented to support our students. Our content teachers collaborate with our ENL teachers to engage in teaching methods in the language developments of our students, in addition to closely monitoring students' language skills so that our students can succeed inside and outside the classroom. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? We seek to hire an additional ESL provider and creating an ENL Advisory where students are updated about colleges, resources, and tutoring to support with their academic progress. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? N/A 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. All school programs are available to all students regardless of any designations. As long as students meet academic and behavioral thresholds, they are able to participate in any activity. These programs include tutoring, Saturday classes, GET program, and Algebra for All. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. Reading Plus, Rosetta Stone, Scantron Performance Series, NEWSELA, classroom library, ReadingWorks, Skedula, Google classroom learning, native language reference material, push in ENL teacher support. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Students have native language resources available to them as needed (i.e. English-Spanish dictionaries, web-based translation applications, etc.). No instruction is provided in native language. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. Curriculum is discussed in content as well as during professional development and prep time. These meetings enable teachers to ensure the appropriateness of lessons and materials for all students, in particular, accounting for the individual needs of our ELLs. ELL instruction time and testing accommodations are provided for current and former ELLs (up to 2 years). Students have 2018-19 SCEP-FL 63  access to resources such as bilingual glossaries, dictionaries, guidance from native-speaking staff members, and online resources. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? School psychologist and the Speech Specialist pull out students who require their services . The use of the library for testing is also communicated between school principals to ensure space is reserved during needed time. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). When a new student arrives, the school secretary contacts the ENL Coordinator to interview students whose language is other than English. As needed, a Home Language Identification Survey is given along with the NYSTILL and the LAB-R. In addition, a parent orientation on ENL program options are given. We make every effort to understand the student's academic and home life so that we can better support the student at school in their academic, emotional, social development. Students and families are also invited to participate in summer bridge program and new student orientation. During student orientation, the ENL coordinator presents information on ENL programming and support to ENL students and families. During orientation, school counselor, parent coordinator, ENL coordinator, administration, and other content teachers welcome all students including ENL students. All students are invited to participate in school activities such as Math Family Night, Movie Night, etc. cipals. Students also have the opportunity to meet with our counseling staff throughout the year. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? All students can take a language of their choice using an interactive computer program in their junior and senior year. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? N/A Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? All faculty members are supported to better serve the ELLs by having time to discuss ELL needs with ENL teachers. In addition, all staff members are encouraged to attend PDs focusing on ELL support. The ENL coordinator also shares teaching strategies and online resources with staff members. Announcements on PDs supporting ELL students are made as needed. Administration and ENL teachers are expected to turnkey information from the PDs they have attended to teachers and other staff members. Outside presenters are also invited to provide professional development to our staff members on aligning the Common Core Learning Standards when serving our diverse student population. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include 2018-19 SCEP-FL 64  how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. Teachers meet amongst grade and content teams to identify needs and develop strategies to support students in their curriculum. Teachers are expected to attend PD onsite and offsite to fulfill the requirements of PD hours on subjects that includes differentiating instruction, analyzing student data, and literacy support across content. For the coming year, PD will be differentiated by experienced teachers and new teachers. Attendance is recorded by sign-in sheets and agendas are provided to staff members. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? Our ENL Coordinator works regularly with our content teachers, parent coordinator, and counselors to contact parents and invite them to meet with the ENL staff to discuss their children's progress, regarding both English acquisition and their success in academic and CTE classes relative to language development. Letters, emails, and phone calls are made to encourage parents to attend parent teacher night, orientation, and other school events to give families opportunities to discuss their child's progress. For the coming year, information sessions will be offered to parents to discuss level of language proficiency and ELL support. Meeting will be conducted with a translator and have the parent coordinator be more involved in the communication process. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. All parents are invited during orientation at the beginning of the year, parent teacher conference, PTA meetings, and other school events to promote parental involvement and foster a sense of community. These are important opportunities for parents to discuss the importance of using technology such as Skedula and communicating their child's attendance, academics, language and social development. We also get guidance in communicating with Spanish speaking families with our parent coordinator and invite parents to game night, graduation, student recognition events, field trip, and other activities that supports our student body. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 65 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Joyce Pulphus, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 66  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: School DBN: Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Joyce Pulphus Title Principal Jessy Simon Assistant Principal Zuri Placencia Parent Coordinator Jennifer Kim ENL/Bilingual Teacher Monica Doyley Parent Sharon Matthews, Special Educa Ramon Payano, Mathematics Teacher/Subject Area Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach School Counselor Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 2018-19 SCEP-FL 67  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 07X522 School Name: Bronx Design & Construction Academy Superintendent: Carron Staple The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Juliany Gonzalez Supervising School Aide Yes Zuri Placencia Parent Coordinator Yes Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. With a high population of students whose home language is Spanish, we assume that all communications to parents must be delivered in both English and Spanish. These communications include phone calls home, which are always made by English-Spanish bilingual personnel; letters delivered by mail; and emails. Additionally, all events at school are conducted bilingually, with Spanish language translation either available or provided outright. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 68  2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral 1.English 2.Spanish. Note: We have a small number of students whose families speak French at home, but in all cases those families are equally proficient in English 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families Newsletters Monthly Calendars Fliers Skedula (online grade book) Monthly Monthly Ongoing Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. Admin will write original document in English, then parent coordinator, Spanish teacher, or Spanish speaking staff member will translate. Parents receive both versions (copied front and back). Same Same Program provides translated version 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 69  Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide Open School Nights September and May interpretation service(s)? Hire interpreters (2-3) to support translation between teachers and parents. They will be positioned on each floor and be on call. Spanish speaking staff member will greet parents and provide directions for parents to meet with teachers. Parent-Teacher Conferences Once a semester Same Awards Assembly SLT and PA meetings Once a semester Monthly Staff member will translate Staff member will translate 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. Mass messaging via Student Messenger, which provides translation for the home language. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) Our office personnel will ensure that these requirements are met by posting all required notifications in the area of our main office. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services 2018-19 SCEP-FL 70  Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? A parent survey will be distributed on a minimum of two occasions during the course of the year (i.e. during regularly scheduled parent-teacher conferences) to determine parents' degree of satisfaction with Spanish language translation and interpretation services. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 71 
