2018-19 SCHOOL COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (SCEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 09X525 School Name: BRONX LEADERSHIP ACADEMY HIGH SCHOOL Principal: IVAN YIP 2018-19 SCEP-FL 1  School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) Section 4: SCEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 SCEP-FL 2  School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information Bronx Leadership Academy HS 09X525 320900011525 9 - 12 1710 Webster Avenue 718-299-4274 School Number (DBN): 718-299-4707 Fax: iyip@schools.nyc.gov Email Address: Phone Number: Ivan Yip School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): Ivan Yip Robert Corcoran Latoya Biggs Courtenay Fortune Latoya Biggs Massiata Dansoko Mariama Simaha Romina Cepeda(Phipps Neighborhoods) CBO Representative: District Information Geographical District: 09 Superintendent’s Office Address: MR. MICHAEL ALCOFF Superintendent: TAFT EDUCATIONAL COMPLEX, 240 E. 172ND STREET, BRONX NY MALCOFF@SCHOOLS.NYC.GOV Superintendent’s Email Address: 718-935-3070 Phone Number: 718-935-5780 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) 2018-19 SCEP-FL 3  BRONX FSC: Executive Director’s Office Address: JOSE RUIZ Executive Director: 1 FORDHAM PLAZA JRUIZ2@SCHOOLS.NYC.GOV Executive Director’s Email Address: 718-828-7776 Phone Number: 718-828-6280 Fax: 2018-19 SCEP-FL 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the SCEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) MS. ROMINA CEPEDA CBO Representative, if applicable Mr. COURTENAY FORTUNE SLT CHAIR/AP SUPERVISION Ms. JESSICA SOTO Member/ UFT PARAPROFESSIONAL 2018-19 SCEP-FL 5 Name IVAN YIP Ms. Gina Pilotti Ms.LATOYA BIGGS Ms. SYLVIA MARRERO Ms. CHRISTINA CONCEPION Ms. MASSIATA DANSOKO Ms. MARIAMA SIMAHA *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Signature (Blue Ink) Name Ms. EMMA CARCAMO Ms. MELINDA POLANCO Mr. ABDUL BEN Mr. ROSCOE BIGGS Mr. LANSAN DANSOKO Ms. NALDA HERNANDEZ Mr. FRANCIS ADIKAN Ms. KRISTON JACKSON Mr. ABUBAKARI ABASS n/a Position and Constituent Group Represented Member/ TEACHER Member/ UFT School Secretary Member/ PARENT Member/ PARENT Member/ PARENT Member /PARENT Member/ PARENT Member/UFT School Counselor Member/PARENT Member/ 2018-19 SCEP-FL 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the School Comprehensive Educational Plan The School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) is a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. The process of developing and implementing the SCEP is aligned to the Framework for Great Schools. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding SCEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department has established programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students supports to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and SCEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint for continuous improvement that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to increase student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 7  In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five (5) goals and action plans that align with the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. Accountability Tools and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is informed by the New York State Education Department’s (NYSED) Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) Tenets, the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Rubric, School Quality Guide and other quantitative and qualitative data tools. NYSED’s Six DTSDE Tenets To strengthen the existing system, the NYSED has developed a tool that captures the best practices from each of the current tools called the Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness. This new tool encompasses multiple instruments such as interviews, classroom observations and surveys. The protocol will begin with a clear and cogent statement of the optimal conditions of an effective school and the instruments comprising the protocol will measure how close or far away a particular school is to the optimal conditions identified. Once reviewed, the school and district will create a strategic plan to address the areas in need of improvement. All current Priority and Focus Schools and Focus Districts must use the tool; districts that are required to submit District Comprehensive Improvement Plans and Comprehensive Educational Plans also will use the tool. The DTSDE protocol includes a rubric, which identifies clear and coherent expectations of the optimal conditions of an effective school and school district across the following six tenets:  Tenet 1: District Leadership and Capacity  Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions  Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support  Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions  Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health, and  Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement 2018-19 SCEP-FL 8  NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The 2017-18 Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) I. II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Structures for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the SCEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the SCEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. Next Steps for SCEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 9   Step 3: In Part 1A of the Section 5: Needs Assessment indicate the Statement of Practice (SOP) from the DTSDE Tenets that will be addressed in the action plan. Schools that received an Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) School Review should use the recommendations from the review to select their SOPs. Schools that did not undergo an IIT review should select SOPs informed by the major findings/recommendations from your most recent Quality Review (QR) or Central-led Review (CLR), and other qualitative and quantitative data.  Step 4: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 5: Build consensus around activities, strategies and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 6: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 7: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 10  Section 4: SCEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Mission: The mission of Bronx Leadership Academy is to educate our students to be committed to personal excellence and to improve the quality of life both within their communities and society as a whole. This will be accomplished by providing a program emphasizing values, education, service to the Bronx and respect for individual differences and cultures. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. Bronx Leadership Academy (“BLA”) sits in District 9 in the South Bronx of NYC. In the years since the school’s creation, the area has shifted from predominantly industrial to an economically vibrant and growing base, with small businesses mixed with national retail establishments. BLA has been approved as of July 1, 2017, to become a community school and we will be partnering with the CBO Phipps Neighborhoods to provide additional supports for our students and their families. Courses are organized on the semester system. Each semester is 18 weeks long. Classes meet 5 times per week for 48 minutes each period. Courses are designed for college preparation and character building, with an emphasis on community service. Honors courses are offered from 10 th to 12 th grade in ELA and Social Studies (both Global History & Geography and US History). After joining the AP for All initiative, Advanced Placement courses are offered for 11 th and 12 th grade students. Students also have the opportunity to take college-level courses through the College Now program in affiliation with Hostos Community College and with Lehman College. We also have joined in a partnership with Berkeley College through its Bridge to College program, in which we will have a free college-credit bearing course (The Psychology of Adjustment) taught at BLA. One of the core programs that help support BLA’s mission is our Law Program, which helps students to develop their critical thinking skills and their oral advocacy skills. In partnership with the Justice Resource Center and the Reed, Smith law firm, our students have the opportunity to compete city-wide and regional tournaments on both the Moot Court Team and the Mock Trial Team. They also have the opportunity to participate the High School Law Institutes at NYU Law School and at Columbia University Law School, and with the Bronx DA’s YTAP Program. Another program that seeks to develop our students’ leadership abilities the Peer Leadership class, which is designed to support individual growth and community involvement BLA also is one of the first schools to have partnered with buildOn! (originally known as Building with Books), a grass-roots organization that raises funds to help build schools in underdeveloped nations around the world—through buildOn’s Trek for Knowledge program, we have sent students and staff to Mali, Nepal and Nicaragua, among other countries, and last year we sent students to Haiti to help build a school! We have partnered with College For Every Student (CFES), a mentoring organization designed to increase students' access and exposure to college. We also have reached out to and formed partnerships with both Lehman College's Project GearUp and the NYCPAL, community organizations that support our students with after-school academic tutoring and sports activities designed to keep them engaged in learning and physical activities. Another highlight of BLA is the cultural exchange program that we have set up with two schools in Denmark. Our students have hosted Danish students in their homes, and then traveled to Denmark to live in the homes of their Danish brothers and sisters. This is a continuing program of visitations and sharing! Finally, BLA is one of only five high schools in New York City (the only school in The Bronx!) to partner with the O’Melveny and Myers law firm, through which our students receive mentoring from attorneys at the firm, as well as the opportunity to receive scholarships for college. In terms of supporting our teachers and improving instruction at the school, this will be our first year as a 2018-19 SCEP-FL 11  member of the Learning Partners Plus program, a collaborative partnership of schools through which our teachers will visit other schools and share best practices to help improve their instruction. Other highlights include: BLA joined the Learning Partners Plus program, partnering with six other schools (Bronx Center for Science and Mathematics, Bronx HS School for Law and Community Service, Belmont Preparatory HS, Pelham Preparatory Academy, Bronxdale HS, and the Theater Arts Production Company School), which provided (and will continue to provide) an opportunity for intervisitations between schools and collaborative professional development to support teachers in their growth. Having taken what we have learned from the LPP program, we have formed our own team of teacher leaders (one from each of the core subjects), to lead their colleagues towards improving their instructional practices. We also applied for and received a grant to bring on staff a full-time Social Worker in order to improve our student attendance, we have allocated resources to bring on additional support staff (Deans); we hired an outside consultant to coach and provide support for teachers. We also continue to benefit from the Hayden Foundation's Bridge Program for our incoming ninth graders, which is used as a support to help transition students to a new school environment, and which provides a model that we will replicate by having a student-to-student mentoring program with which we have upperclassmen mentoring ninth graders to support them academically and socially. Finally, we have partnered with students from Manhattan College, who provide mentoring for our students and college tours to expose them to college life and what to expect. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. BLA is a comprehensive, four-year public high school serving grades 9 to 12. BLA was founded in 1993 through the collaborative efforts of South Bronx Churches, the then-Board of Education, and parents of students in the Bronx looking for a safe and academically challenging high school with an emphasis on community development. The student body is composed of students primarily from the local area and from the Bronx in general. The total student enrollment for 2017-18 is approximately 600, with a population that is 38% African American, 60% Latino and 2% other. BLA sits in District 9 in the South Bronx of NYC. In the years since the school’s creation, the area has shifted from predominantly industrial to an economically vibrant and growing base, with small businesses mixed with national retail establishments. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. Framework for Great Schools: The elements in which the school made the most progress were in terms of building Strong Family-Community ties and reinforcing Collaborative Teachers as a key to our school's success. This is evidenced by the outreach that we performed to establish ties with community-based organizations and by the new structures put in place to increase parental involvement in the life of the school. One example is that we invited some speakers from the Administration for Child Services (ACS) to come in for workshops with parents that were designed to explain the role of ACS in supporting parents and their children to ensure that they see education as a key to success. It is also evidenced by our joining the Learning Partners Plus Program, which will improve instruction by allowing our teachers to visit other schools, share best practices and turnkey much of what they learn in the program to share with their colleagues. The key areas of focus this year will be to continue to provide structures for 2018-19 SCEP-FL 12  Collaborative Teachers so they can support one another to improve their craft, as well as to focus on Rigorous Instruction in support of student learning and engagement. As we enter the new school year, BLA continues to face several challenges. For the past few years, BLA’s performance indicators have not been where the school community wants or expects them to be—consequently, a new push has started from the beginning of last school year to increase the rigor of instruction, raise expectations and improve the school tone. Much of this change will occur through the improvement of instruction and impressing upon our students the higher expectations we have of both their behavior and their academics, while providing the instructional support to help them meet and exceed these expectations. We also seek to improve student and staff attendance and morale. To help us achieve these goals, we will be partnering with Phipps Neighborhoods as our CBO partner as we transition to becoming a community school. Establishing an effective partnership will be a key focus for providing these supports to our staff and our families. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 13  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 09X525 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 09,10,11,12 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 583 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 94 77 10 5 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 41 19 5 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 87.0% % Attendance Rate 86.6% % Reduced Lunch 20.1% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.2% 65.5% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 1.7% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 4.08 3% 33% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation 60% 49% 53.8% 0.0% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) No N/A 57 56 80.9% 0.3% 29.0% 31.4% 0.5% 0.9% 6 21% 8.4 N/A N/A 64% 58% 67.7% 9% N/A No Yes Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No No Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups SWD, Hispanic, ED, Black, ED Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A NO N/A YSH NO Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A NO N/A YSH NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient N/A YES N/A NO N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A NO N/A N/A N/A NO NO N/A N/A N/A NO YES N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 SCEP-FL 14  Economically Disadvantaged YES ALL STUDENTS YES 2018-19 SCEP-FL 15  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 3 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 3.2 The school leader ensures and supports the quality implementation of a systematic plan of rigorous and coherent curricula appropriately aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS) that is monitored and adapted to meet the needs of students. Teachers develop and ensure that unit and lesson plans used include data-driven instruction (DDI) protocols that are appropriately aligned to the CCLS and NYS content standards and address student achievement needs. The school leader and teachers have developed a comprehensive plan for teachers to partner within and across all grades and subjects to create interdisciplinary curricula targeting the arts, technology, and other enrichment opportunities. Teachers implement a comprehensive system for using formative and summative assessments for strategic short and long-range curriculum planning that involves student reflection, tracking of, and ownership of learning. 3.3 3.4 3.5 SOP(s) Addressed X X X X Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Strengths : -CCLS-aligned curricula -Focus on skill-building and deeper understanding -Hired outside consultant (Agiri Learning Partners) to support teacher growth -Teacher-team meetings and common planning are built into the program -PD is provided on a regular basis by APs of Supervision as well as outside providers (Agiri Learning Partners) -System of in-house intervisitations set up between departments -Learning from our Learning Partners Program experience and creating our own in-house LPP teacher-leader team 2018-19 SCEP-FL 16  Needs : -increasing stamina of students in reading and writing -improved Regents performance -improved credit accumulation, particularly for 10 th & 11 th grades -improved instructional practices (e.g., scaffolding, use of multiple-entry points, CCLS-aligned instruction) Data sources : -Regents scholarship reports -credit accumulation reports/transcripts -Quality Review Report 2015-16 / 2016-17 (preliminary findings) -High School Quality Report 2015-16 -NYC School Survey 2015-16 -teacher observation reports -midterm assessments -NYC Performance Task results Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, there will be a 10% increase in the overall passing percentage of juniors taking the Common Core English Regents exam when supported by the implementation of literacy strategies (e.g., annotation and M.E.A.L.) across all disciplines. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 17  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). - Literacy strategies will be incorporated into all disciplines (e.g., annotation, warm and cool feedback, close reading, etc.) 10th grade students 9/2018 to 6/2019 - Administration of biweekly writing assessments - Student-centered learning instructional strategies - PD (e.g., , classroom management, using data to inform instruction; Integrated CoTeaching ("ICT)" methodologies; Writing Revolution workshops; revision process and writing strategies) After-school tutoring; Saturday Academy; push-in model for ENLs; ICT classes for core subjects; SC classes taught by special education teacher; administration of mock Regents exams 10th grade students 9/2018 to 6/2019 Parent Learning walks; School Leadership Team parents 9/2018 to 6/2019 ("SLT") membership; parent workshops - participation in Respect for All ("RFA") workshops All students 9/2018 to 6/2019 Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Principal; APs of Supervision; teachers; Program Chair, Phipps Neighborhood team Special Education & general education teachers; ESL teachers; APs of Supervision; Principal, Phipps Neighborhood team Parent Coordinator; SLT members; Literacy Coach; APs of Supervision; Principal, Phipps Neighborhood team Teachers; students; administrators, Phipps Neighborhood team 2018-19 SCEP-FL 18  - after-school clubs to enrich students’ experiences & encourage their -participation in school: e.g., Men’s Club; Women’s Club; MOTH Story Slam; Drama Club; Movie Club - cohort meetings to address grade-specific needs/areas of concern - Peer Leadership (Question Project) class -celebrations and awards ceremonies 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Starting in June 2018 through June 2019, we will hold quarterly community forums and parent workshops designed to help our parents understand what Common Core instruction means and how it is different from the way they learned as students. We will also provide workshops in ESL and basic computer skills to support our parents, which, in turn, will support their students at home as they will have a greater understanding of the tasks students are assigned. Teachers, administrators, school-based support staff and our Phipps Neighborhoods team will work together to facilitate these events. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. -Continual budget alignment will take place: for Human Resources personnel (teachers, paraprofessionals, school aides, administrators, etc.); instructional supplies (textbooks; online learning programs, educational software, classroom computer technology [e.g., Promethean digital learning boards, laptops, printers, etc.) -Continual assessment will also take place to adjust, as needed: student needs/scheduling needs (e.g., elective classes, mandated subject classes, common periods for teacher collaboration, etc.); teacher per session; per diem allocation for substitutes; administrator per session, etc. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) X X Title I SWP Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding X C4E Other 2018-19 SCEP-FL 19  Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. -Midterm assessments will be administered in November 2018 (uniform assessments modeled after the Common Core ELA exam) and in December 2018 (mock Common Core ELA Regents exam). The results from the November 2018 assessment will be used as a baseline to determine growth after administration of the December mock Common Core ELA exam. -January 2019 Regents exam results will also be used to measure growth and the impact of rigorous instruction -scholarship data assessed at the end of each marking period (e.g., report cards, teacher reports, transcripts) Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Grade-level uniform ELA Assessments / Mock ELA Regents exams Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 20  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 5 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 5.2 The school leader establishes overarching systems and understandings of how to support and sustain student social and emotional developmental health and academic success. 5.3 The school articulates and systematically promotes a vision for social and emotional developmental health that is aligned to a curriculum or program that provides learning experiences and a safe and healthy school environment for families, teachers, and students. 5.4 All school stakeholders work together to develop a common understanding of the importance of their contributions in creating a school community that is safe, conducive to learning, and fostering of a sense of ownership for providing social and emotional developmental health supports tied to the school’s vision. 5.5 The school leader and student support staff work together with teachers to establish structures to support the use of data to respond to student social and emotional developmental health needs. X X X X SOP(s) Addressed Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? Strengths : -Strong relationships built between students & adults and student-to-student -Open Door policy -Alumni support (Alumni Career Day) -Extracurricular activities -Student empowerment (SLT membership; Student Council) -Teachers in distributed leadership roles (on e.g., SLT, PD Committee, Consultation Committee, LT Team, QR Team) 2018-19 SCEP-FL 21  -Summer Bridge Program for incoming ninth graders (with support provided by upper-class student mentors) Needs : -increase teacher satisfaction (75% positive responses) -improve school tone (73% positive responses) -increase rigor of instruction (78% positive responses) -increase student engagement in classrooms (73% positive responses) -increase parent involvement in school activities (86% positive responses) Source :NYC School Survey 2016-17 Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools –Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 50% of at-risk ninth graders will show improvement in scholarship (accumulating 10 or more credits) by engaging in a structured mentoring program with a high-performing upperclassman through peer accountability initiative in partnership with our Phipps Neighborhoods Community School team. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 22  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). -LPP intervisitations will support teacher learning/ improvement Teachers 9/18 to 6/189 -Model Teachers will open their classrooms for intravisitations Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Administrators, Teachers, School Counselors, partner school staff (teachers, administration, counselors, etc.), Phipps Neighborhood team -Teachers will share best practices -Learning Walks facilitated by LT Model Teachers -Peer Leadership class will provide training for student mentors -push-in ENL teacher for supporting content-area teachers -LT team meetings -teacher-team meetings weekly to discuss student progress -Inquiry teams -Teacher Learning Walks -Teacher intervisitations with partner schools -Model Teacher-led PD to share best practices -Student mentoring events (e.g., NHS-Sponsored meet and greet) -Mentor and mentee social gatherings (e.g., awards ceremonies) -CFES mentoring programs 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Teachers; school counselors 9/18 to 6/19 Teachers, School Counselors and administrators, Phipps Neighborhood team Teachers 9/18 to 6/19 Teachers, Administrators, School Counselors, Phipps Neighborhood team Students and parents 9/18 to 6/19 Teachers, LT Team, COSA, Phipps Neighborhood team How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 23  Starting in July 2018, through our partnership with our CBO (Phipps Neighborhoods), teachers, administrators and support staff will engage parents by holding community forums and parent workshops designed to increase their understanding of the importance of attendance, credit accumulation, behavioral concerns and a variety of celebrations for our students’ accomplishments. These activities will promote active engagement in the school throughout the school year. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. -Continual budget alignment will take place also: for Human Resources personnel (teachers, paraprofessionals, school aides, administrators, etc.); instructional supplies (textbooks; online learning programs, educational software, classroom computer technology [e.g., Promethean digital boards, laptops, printers, etc.) -Continual assessment will also take place to adjust, as needed: student needs/scheduling needs (e.g., elective classes, mandated subject classes, common periods for teacher collaboration, etc.); teacher per session; per diem allocation for substitutes; administrator per session, etc. -per session funds for staff to attend/assist/participate in LPP workshops and interschool visitations Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) X X Title I SWP Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding X C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, at least 30% of at-risk ninth graders will have been paired with an upper-class student mentor and engaged in at least two mentoring activities. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Student mentor logs/community forum logs will be kept Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 24  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 4 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 4.2 School and teacher leaders ensure that instructional practices and strategies are organized around annual, unit, and daily lesson plans that address all student goals and needs. 4.3 Teachers provide coherent, and appropriately aligned Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS)-based instruction that leads to multiple points of access for all students. 4.4 Teachers and students work together to implement a program/plan to create a learning environment that is responsive to students’ varied experiences and tailored to the strengths and needs of all students. 4.5 Teachers inform planning and foster student participation in their own learning process by SOP(s) Addressed X X X X using a variety of summative and formative data sources (e.g., screening, interim measures, and progress monitoring). Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Strengths : -Common planning is built into schedule -Teacher teams meet on regularly scheduled basis -PD sessions are provided by our APs of Supervision and outside providers, with direction from PD Committee -Teachers sit on PD Committee to help decide on tiered PD offerings -Model Teachers learn and share best practices with other schools through the Learning Partners Program -Teachers sit on the Hiring Committee and have a share in hiring decisions 2018-19 SCEP-FL 25  Needs : -teachers using data to inform instruction -Inquiry work will be instituted during common periods -consistency in practice for all teachers (student-centered instruction) -increasing the use of higher-order questions during instruction (D.o.K) -improve actionable feedback to teachers by consistent use of Danielson framework Source : Quality Review report (2015-16) & 2017-18 SSEF (preliminary findings) Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019 every general education teacher will meet with a special education teacher to implement strategies designed to support our special education students in achieving the school’s instructional focus—students’ lexile levels will be assessed using NEWSELA and instruction will be targeted to meet students’ needs to result in a 10% improvement in students’ lexile levels. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 26  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) -General and Special Ed teachers will meet to modify/supplement existing EngageNY curriculum to differentiate units of study. Teachers -Teachers will analyze student performance on the NYC ELA Performance Task to inform instruction, including intervention support. 9/18 to 6/19 Administrators, Program Chair, Teachers, Literacy Coach, PD Committee, IEP Coordinator, Model Teachers, Phipps Neighborhoods team -Teacher teams will meet weekly to assess student progress in reading (Lexile levels) and writing. Teams will meet to norm student work products and align expectations across the grade. -Teams will meet for inquiry for instructional planning based on success in student progress. -Professional Development will be provided on co-teaching models, how to differentiate tasks and curricula for struggling students and reading intervention strategies. -PD on ICT methodologies Teachers -SESIS training for all teachers -ELL training for ESL teachers to turnkey -RtI training 9/18 to 6/19 Administrators, Literacy Coach, Teachers, IEP Coordinator, ENL Coordinator, Phipps Neighborhoods team -Parent Learning walks will be used to provide feedback to teachers Teachers 9/18 to 6/19 Parents (PA Executive Board), 2018-19 SCEP-FL 27  -Lead Teacher-Model Teachers will turnkey PD for their colleagues -Teacher participation/empowerment in all aspects of leadership/instruction focus -Teachers will visit partner schools through the LT program to learn and share best practices, after which they will share with colleagues and incorporate practices into their own classrooms 3b – Parent and Family Engagement SLT Committee, Literacy Coach, Parent Coordinator, Phipps Neighborhoods team Teachers 9/18 to 6/19 Teachers, Administrators, PD Committee, Consultation Committee, SLT Committee, Model Teachers, Phipps Neighborhoods team How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Throughout the 2018-19 school year, teachers, administrators and school support staff will work together with our Phipps Neighborhoods CBO team to improve outreach to our parents through the use of in-school conferences, community forums, and parent workshops. These meetings will be designed to share curriculum, programming and support services the school will provide for our students. We will also be using technology such as Kinvolved and Remind to reach out to parents through digital/electronic communication means. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. -Budget allocation to hire additional Special Education teachers (3) -Budget allocation to hire additional ENL teacher -Allocate per session and per diem funds for teachers and administrators for the LT program -allocation for Social Studies consultant to assist with curriculum development and instructional support -allocation for outside PD providers Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) X X Title I SWP Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding X C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 28  By January 2019, at least 50% of general education teachers will have met and planned with a special education teacher. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. PD workshop agendas and sign-in sheets Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 29  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 2 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 2.2 The school leader ensures that the school community shares the Specific, Measurable, Ambitious, Results-oriented, and Timely (SMART) goals/mission and long-term vision inclusive of core values that address the priorities outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP). Leaders make strategic decisions to organize programmatic, human, and fiscal capital resources. 2.3 2.4 The school leader has a fully functional system in place aligned to the district's Annual Professional Performance Review (APPR) to conduct targeted and frequent observation and track progress of teacher practices based on student data and feedback. 2.5 Leaders effectively use evidence-based systems and structures to examine and improve critical individual and school-wide practices as defined in the SCEP (student achievement, curriculum and teacher practices; leadership development; community/family engagement; and student social and emotional developmental health). X X X X SOP(s) Addressed Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Strengths : -Resources are well-aligned to our instructional goals to empower teachers to collaboratively construct opportunities for students to learn -Teachers design curricula that are aligned to standards -School leaders have established a culture for learning that communicates and supports high expectations to staff and Students -Distributive leadership is ingrained in the school culture (e.g., teachers sit on PD Committee, Hiring Committee, Consultation Committee, Inquiry Team) -Participation in the Learning Partners Program with a focus on rigorous instruction and effective school leadership 2018-19 SCEP-FL 30  Needs : -Administrators must ensure consistency in the use of pedagogical practices that promote effective, student-centered collaboration -Administrators must sharpen feedback to teachers by consistently specifying next steps and action plans that connect teacher practice to student outcomes -Administrators must continue building capacity by using Danielson framework for observations and the feedback cycle Source : -Quality Review Report (2015-2016) & 2016-17 (preliminary findings) Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART– Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 25% of teachers will earn a “Highly Effective” rating in component 3b on Advance as a result of targeted professional development and actionable feedback provided by all administrators. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 31  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Differentiated PD will be given to effective teachers on Danielson Framework Highly Effective domain indicators. Teachers 9/18 to 9/19 Administrators, Teachers, Phipps Neighborhoods team -PD on multiple entry points Teachers 9/18 to 9/19 Administrators, LPP -PD on ICT methodologies -PD on meeting needs of ELLs -Teachers will attend professional learning opportunities to build capacity and improve instructional practice, including NYCDOE PD through the Bronx FSC -Parent Learning walks Teachers Collaborative leadership structures (teacher participation on: SLT Committee; PD Committee; Consultation Committee; Hiring Committee; Model Teachers in LPP Teachers 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Model Teachers, ENL Coordinator, IEP Coordinator, Phipps Neighborhoods team 9/18 to 9/19 Administrators, Model Teachers, Teachers, Phipps Neighborhoods team 9/18 to 9/19 Administrators, Program Chair, Teachers, Phipps Neighborhoods team How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Teachers, administrators and support staff will partner with our Phipps Neighborhoods community school team to the opportunity to keep our parents informed of the instructional strategies being used by teachers and how the parents can support their students’ learning at home. These forums will also work with our families to provide action steps designed to increase family engagement and parent leadership. These activities will include parent-requested workshops (e.g., ENL classes, basic computer classes, understanding Common Core classes) and community forums to assess and address the school community’s needs. These forums will keeps parents engaged in the academic and social lives of their students. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 32  Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. -Budgetary allocations for ENL Coordinator position and IEP Coordinator -Budgetary allocation for per session and per diem to support inter-school visitations -Budgetary allocation for Social Studies consultant to provide curriculum development and instructional feedback -Build common periods for each department into the class master schedule to facilitate teacher collaboration Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) X X Title I SWP Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding X C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By the end of January 2019, at least 12% of teachers will show improvement towards a Highly Effective rating in 3b. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Observation reports using the Danielson Framework in Advance. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 33  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 6 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 6.2 The school leader ensures that regular communication with students and families fosters their high expectations for student academic achievement. 6.3 The school engages in effective planning and reciprocal communication with family and community stakeholders so that student strength and needs are identified and used to augment learning. 6.4 The school community partners with families and community agencies to promote and provide training across all areas (academic and social and emotional developmental health) to support student success. 6.5 The school shares data in a way that promotes dialogue among parents, students, and school community members centered on student learning and success and encourages and empowers families to understand and use data to advocate for appropriate support services for their children. X X X X SOP(s) Addressed Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Strengths : -School-wide open door policy -Online Skedula/Pupilpath database to enable parent monitoring of student progress -Parent Coordinator on staff -Parent participation on SLT Committee -Parent engagement time built in to weekly schedule -96% of parents are satisfied with the education their child receives -Parent Learning Walks established 2018-19 SCEP-FL 34  -Partnerships established with community organizations (NYC PAL, Project GearUp, ENACT, Camp Ramapo) Needs : -low parent response rates/attendance at meetings, School Surveys. -low parent participation in PA meetings Source : -NYC School Survey 2016-17 -High School Quality Snapshot 2016-17 Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, parent participation in PA meetings and response rate on the NYC School Survey will increase by 25% or greater through the implementation of direct parental outreach activities (e.g., parent workshops, community forums, etc.) by school staff and the Phipps Neighborhoods community school team. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 35  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) 9/18 to 6/19 Administrators, Parent Coordinator, COSA, Teachers, Program Chair, Phipps Neighborhoods team - Monthly parent workshops will be offered to encourage improved school-family partnership and to promote increased student achievement. Students and parents -Phipps Neighborhood will help with developing innovative communication resources, including parent letters in English and native languages, flyers, telephone calls, email, broadcast telephone outreach, e-Board and school web sites will inform families of school events and activities. -School sponsored activities will be planned to expand school and home partnerships, including Parent Nights, Meet the Staff Night, Family Fun Nights, after-school programs. -Family workshops will be provided to build capacity in topics such as English language acquisition, nutrition, community and cultural resources, family finance and health, etc. -SLT meetings -Awards ceremonies -Student-of-the-Month recognitions -Academic scholarship recognition at the end of each marking period -Perfect attendance recognition on a monthly basis -Awards ceremonies inclusive of ELLs, Special-needs students, most-improved students, etc. Students and parents -Academic achievement recognition at the end of each marking period -Student-of-the-Month awards 9/18 to 6/19 Teachers, Program Chair, COSA, Parent Coordinator, Administrators, Phipps Neighborhoods team 2018-19 SCEP-FL 36  -Awards ceremonies in the evenings to encourage parent attendance Teachers and parents -SLT Committee parent members -Parental engagement time built into schedule -PD provided on how to talk to parents -Teachers encouraged to reach out to parents to acknowledge positive behaviors/accomplishments of students, not just negative -All members of school community are empowered and have a voice in the school (e.g., students on Student Council & SLT, parents on SLT, teachers on PD, SLT & Consultation committees) Students, teachers and parents 9/18 to 6/19 Teachers, Program Chair, COSA, Parent Coordinator, Administrators, Phipps Neighborhoods team 9/18 to 6/19 Teachers, Program Chair, COSA, Parent Coordinator, Administrators, Phipps Neighborhoods team 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. Phipps Neighborhoods Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. -Budget allocation for per session -Budget allocation for Parent Coordinator and parent-related activities -Budget modification for Program Chair -Scheduling modification for Parent engagement activities Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) X X Title I SWP Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding X C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 37  By the January 2019, parent attendance will increase by 10% at PA meetings and will be monitored by sign-in sheets maintained by the Parent Coordinator. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. PA meeting and parent activity sign-in sheets Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 38  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Mathematics Science Social Studies Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Students who are at risk of not accumulating 10+ credits by June 2016; students who have failed the CCELA Regents exam Students who are at risk of not accumulating 10+ credits by June 2016; students who have failed the Algebra Regents exam Students who are at risk of not accumulating 10+ credits by June 2016; students who have failed the Living Environment Regents exam Students who are at risk of not accumulating 10+ credits by June 2016; students who have failed the Global History and/or US History Regents exams Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Use of multiple-entry points; RtI to tier students; use of formative, informal and substantive assessments; cross content integration Use of multiple-entry points; RtI to tier students; use of formative, informal and substantive assessments; cross content integration Use of multiple-entry points; RtI to tier students; use of formative, informal and substantive assessments; cross content integration Use of multiple-entry points; RtI to tier students; use of formative, informal and substantive assessments; cross content integration Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) Small-group tutoring; one-on-one tutoring; pull-out instruction; push-in instruction When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) After school; during Saturday Academy; during the school day Small-group tutoring; one-on-one tutoring; pull-out instruction; push-in instruction After school; during Saturday Academy; during the school day Small-group tutoring; one-on-one tutoring; pull-out instruction; push-in instruction After school; during Saturday Academy; during the school day Small-group tutoring; one-on-one tutoring; pull-out instruction; push-in instruction After school; during Saturday Academy; during the school day 2018-19 SCEP-FL 39 At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Students who are at risk of not accumulating 10+ credits by June 2016; students who are under-credited Use of multiple-entry points; RtI to tier students; use of formative, informal and substantive assessments; cross content integration Small-group tutoring; one-on-one tutoring; pull-out instruction; push-in instruction After school; during Saturday Academy; during the school day 2018-19 SCEP-FL 40  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 77 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. School supplies; school clothing/apparel; Social Worker support; School Counselor support Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 41  N/A 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. N/A 2018-19 SCEP-FL 42  Section 8: Title I Program Information Directions:  All schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. Our school is proud of our tradition of attracting and retaining high quality, highly qualified teachers who are committed to the school’s mission of excellence. -Having a solid collaborative working relationship with teachers, parents and students makes for a pleasant work and learning environment. -Highly qualified teachers are always looking to work in schools where creativity is encouraged and supported. As part of our Recruitment efforts, we will reach out to local area graduate education programs and continue our partnerships with them (e.g., Hunter College School of Ed., Pace University, Teachers College, etc.) to attract and retain highly qualified teachers. As part of our partnership, we will attend seminars at the invitation of our partners to speak to graduates of their programs about what to expect and how our school can support them in their development as teachers. -We also will be providing a new-teacher orientation the week before teachers are to report in order to help our new teachers transition to the school setting and help them better meet the expectations and demands they will face as new teachers. Music, Art, Sports and other elective courses are the keys to balancing a well-rounded education, and they are often what keeps students in school. We remain committed to invest in seeking and retaining talented highly qualified teachers to teach Drama, Music and the Arts. Staff development is centered around our daily common time devoted to sharing best practices. Resource management strategies and discussions around creative thinking are encouraged and evaluated for effectiveness. The common-planning theme is improving instruction by using technology and multiple-entry points during instruction in the classroom, and teaching for depth over breadth. Teachers are members of the Hiring Committee and have direct input on hiring decisions, which helps promote leadership within the school building and raises the perception of teacher candidates in terms of how teachers are a vital part of the school’s decision-making team 2018-19 SCEP-FL 43  2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the strategies and activities for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, staff, and paraprofessionals that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). We have hired an education consultant to provide professional development and help mentor new teachers. We also have worked with our FSC team to provide additional support for our Social Studies teachers in preparation for the new Global Regents exam. Our two Assistant Principals of Supervision also provide professional development during common-planning periods, and encourage teachers to seek and participate in external PD opportunities, after which they turnkey the information to their colleagues. We also work collaboratively with support personnel from our Borough support team to provide ongoing support for our teachers in the classrooms. Furthermore, teachers will now provide much of the PD in the building to support their colleagues' growth Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/information, early intervention services, etc.). N/A 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. Teachers are an integral part of the decision-making process—they are part of the School Leadership Team, the PD Committee, the Hiring Committee and the Consultation Committee, and they work in collaboration with the Principal and Assistant Principals to evaluate different programs and assessment measures. Teachers also work with guidance from the APs of Supervision to develop cross-disciplinary curricula to support the school’s goals and support students in meeting all graduation requirements. Teachers also serve as Model Teachers in the Learning Partners Program, through which they learn and share best practices from partner schools in the LPP consortium. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 44  4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds enables, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (SCEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Title I Part A (Basic) Title I School Improvement 1003(a) Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funds Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 556,257 16,979 91859 0 13,646 0 424,956 X X X X X Column B Section Reference(s) Section 5 Section 5 Section 5 Section 5 Section 5 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 45  Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I School Improvement 1003(a): To support implementation of school improvement activities identified through the Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) reviews or a school review with district oversight and included in the DCIP/SCEP.  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: To support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs.  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan.  Title I Priority and Focus School Parent Engagement Set-aside: Additional set-aside is to enable greater and  more meaningful parent participation in the education of their children. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.  Grant funds awarded via a competitive process, including Title I 1003(g) SIG or SIF funds: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 46  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. 09X525, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Bronx Leadership Academy HS will support parents and families of Title I students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; 2018-19 SCEP-FL 47  ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; The school’s Parent Involvement strategies will be enhanced and supported by our partnership with the Phipps Neighborhoods community school team Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; 2018-19 SCEP-FL 48  ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Elementary and Secondary Education Act (ESSA); ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 49 School-Parent Compact (SPC)  School-Parent Compact (SPC) 09X525, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; 2018-19 SCEP-FL 50  ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; 2018-19 SCEP-FL 51  ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; 2018-19 SCEP-FL 52  Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. Addendum: Community School Partnerships Directions: The Community School (CS) strategy is directly aligned to the Framework for Great Schools. Community Schools bring schools and community partners together and integrate academics, health, youth development, and family engagement to provide students with the tools and opportunities they need to succeed. The Core Services in Community Schools are Expanded Learning Time (ELT), Attendance Supports, Family Engagement, and Health & Wellness. Part 1 – Community School Partnerships Goal(s) How is the CS strategy integrated into academic instruction at your school, and what impact has it had on student academic outcomes? The CS Phipps Neighborhoods team will be working with teachers, counselors and members of the Attendance Team to improve the attendance of students who fall below 90% YTD attendance. This support will include working with students in classrooms, before and after school, and during lunch periods. The CS team will also include a mental health clinician who will be working with students and their families to provide needed mental health counseling and support services, including, but not limited to outside referrals where needed. The CS team will also be providing support for teachers to relieve stress and improve mental health and well-being (e.g., morning yoga sessions). The intended outcome will be an increase in community efficacy for all members of the school community--teachers will be better prepared for the challenges of the profession, students will begin to have higher expectations of themselves, and parents will increase their involvement in the lives of their students. Indicate the summative goal(s) of the Community School for the 2018-19 school year. Be sure to construct the goal to be SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Realistic, and Time-bound. By June 2018, overall student attendance will increase to at least 85%. Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Community School Annual Goal(s): How will achieving your Community School Goal(s)--in Expanded Learning Time (ELT), Attendance Supports, Family Engagement, and Health & Wellness--support your academic goals for students? 2018-19 SCEP-FL 53  With improved attendance, students will improve their performance outcomes in terms of credit accumulation, Regents passing percentage, and overall graduation rate, Part 2 – Community School Partnerships Core Services Action Plan Part 2a. Identify the Community-based Organization (CBO) partnerships that you will develop in ELT, Attendance Supports, Family Engagement, and Health & Wellness, their target student population(s), and scope of the services provided. As well as supporting schools’ supportive environment and attendance work, CBOs should be helping to support your school’s instructional focus. Scope of Service SY18-19 SMART Goal CBO Partnership Astor Services Target Population At-risk students with behavioral concerns Astor Services/100 Schools Project Teachers Mental Health counseling Stress management, time management By June 2018, there will be a 10% decrease in the number of disciplinary referrals By June 2018, there will be a 10% decrease in the number of teacher absences By June 2018, there will be a 10% improvement in the number of students reporting satisfaction with their school, as measured by the NYC School Survey buildOn! students Community service opportunities Part 3 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 3a. Indicate resources your Community Partnership will leverage to achieve your summative SMART goal(s) and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. We will work with school staff and administration to provide support services for teachers and students through a variety of retreats (e.g., staff retreat at the Long Island Adventure Park, Camp Ramapo retreats for students by cohort, College trips, etc.). Classroom supports will be provided by Student Advocates. Parental outreach will be conducted by a Family Resource Specialist, and counseling will be provided by a Mental Health Counselor. Part 3b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) X Title I SWP Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 3c. Describe how the school will partner with the Lead CBO to do the following: 1. Community Schools are expected to partner with a community-based partner organization (CBO) and together with members of the School Leadership Team, hire a Community School Director. The Director will 2018-19 SCEP-FL 54  2. 3. 4. lead implementation of the asset and needs assessment process, and other critically important coordinating activities. Indicate how you will leverage this aspect of the work. Community Schools are expected to personalize the needs of all students, through strategic programming and services, as determined by the asset and needs assessment, and must also offer Expanded Learning Time (ELT) and mental health programming. In completing this section, ensure that you think about how: (1) the right services are provided to the right students and families at the right time; and (2) how you will seamlessly coordinate services with instructional programming happening throughout and outside of the school day. Indicate how you will implement this work, and describe other programming you anticipate to be in place to strengthen this initiative. Community Schools are expected to emerge as Partnership Schools, which are places where parents and families feel welcome, actively participate in the conversation and decision-making around the renewal of their schools, and have many opportunities to advocate for their children. Monthly meetings and Community School Forums engaging families and community stakeholders will be a critical part of this family engagement strategy. Describe how you will implement this aspect of the work. Community School Principals are expected to meet on a weekly basis with their Community School Director, select Assistant Principals, key staff, and other CBOs, to analyze trends in data and case manage individual students. Data tools – including the New Visions Data Sorter - and training will be available for schools to use. Indicate how you will implement this aspect of the work. 1. We have facilitated a partnership w/Astor Services to provide a Mental Health Counselor and a Family Resource Specialist. We have also partnered with buildOn! to provide community service and internship opportunities for students. 2. A needs assessment was administered to determine the school's needs/priorities, from which, in consultation with the school's administrative team, to develop an action plan to help address the school's needs. After-school ELT services will be provided. ESL and GED services for adults during evening and Saturday hours will be provided to support our parents. We will engage with outside providers (e.g., ENACT) to provide these services. 3. We will work with the school's administration to schedule CS forums and weekly adult education (ESL and TASC) to encourage and increase parent involvement. Other activities will include Family Game Nights and multicultural festivals to celebrate family heritage. 4. We will meet twice weekly with the Administrative cabinet to review each week's progress towards meeting the school's needs and also to address upcoming concerns. Once the school is provided access with the sorter we will use it to determine intervention strategies. Part 4 – Community School Partnerships Oversight Part 4a. Key Staff and Partners 1. Name and describe the scope of involvement of all community partners working in the school (include partners supporting ELT, counseling, enrichment, etc.) 2. Name the members of your Community School Team and how meetings will be organized and structured to engage all stakeholders and be focused on results. 3. Explain data strategies including the use of the data sorter, and steps that the school will take to ensure that the appropriate interventions are provided to the right students 1. Astor Services (mental health counseling services); ENACT (ELT after-school tutoring) 2. CS Team: Romina Cepeda (CSD); Mustafa Riza (Senior Student Advocate); Scarlet Spence (Student Advocate); Zaneta Albanese (Program Coordinator). Meetings will take place on a weekly basis. Members of the CS Team will 2018-19 SCEP-FL 55  meet weekly with the Administrative cabinet and address concerns with the school staff during monthly faculty meetings. Part 4b. Indicate resources needed including human resources, instructional resources, and schedule adjustments to implement the Community School program. Funding for staff and student retreats (registration fees, transportation, etc. will be required. Part 4c. Timeline for implementation and completion, including start and end dates. The partnership will began in August 2017 and will continue to take place throughout the school year 2018-19, and for an additional two years. Part 4d. Mental Health Work Plan Separate from this S/CEP, schools will complete a Mental Health Work Plan that will become an addendum to this document. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 56  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: Bronx Leadership Academy HS This school is (check one): DBN: 09x525 conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): K 6 1 7 2 8 3 9 4 10 5 11 12 2018-19 SCEP-FL 57  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: Rationale: Bronx Leadership Academy's Saturday Academy has been designed to provide small-group instruction to our struggling at-risk ELL students (those in the bottom-third who are in danger of not being promoted or not graduating in a timely fashion). After reviewing NYSESLAT data, Regents scores, and credit accumulation rates, we determine those ELL students that need the most support in the areas of reading and writing. The program will target 45 ELL students. Subgroups and grade levels: Subgroups Grades # of Students Newcomers (0-3 years) 9-12 1 6 3-5 Years 9-12 14 LTELLS (6 years or more) 9-12 32 Total 62 students Schedule and Duration: The Saturday program will begin in December of 2016 and take place every other Saturday for 24 weeks, ending in early June, with the classes running from 9:00 AM to 12:00 PM. After-school tutoring will take place on Tuesdays, Wednesdays and Thursdays, from 3:30 to 5:00 PM. Language of Instruction: The classes will be taught in English. Number and Types of Certified Teachers: The program will be run by seven teachers. One teacher is a certified ENL teacher and the ENL program coordinator. Three of the teachers are Special Education teachers as well, who serve our students that receive both Special Education and ELL services. One teacher is an ELA teacher. The remaining content-area teachers are certified in ELA and Math. ENL teachers will team teach with content-area teachers to support instruction our ENL students. Types of Materials: -The program uses high-interest reading materials and online resources designed to maintain our students' focus and promote their desire to succeed. Students are provided with leveled reading materials based on data collected from the NYSESLAT and the Progress to Graduation Tracker. The teachers create lessons to support the students in the areas of reading and writing in the 2018-19 SCEP-FL 58  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information content area of ELA, specifically targeting the areas of reading comprehension, vocabulary accumulation, critical thinking, and making connections between literary texts and non-fiction texts in writing. The students are also being supported in Math with teachers using Regents and State Exam scores to create a Regents Preparatory program to help students move towards college readiness in that subject. -The lesson plans will follow the Sheltered Instructional Observation Protocol (SIOP) model to support the acquisition of academic vocabulary necessary for students to achieve greater levels of success on the NYSESLAT, Regents Exams, and classroom performance. -Materials for parents will be sent home using their home languages (primarily Spanish), as will other communications to parents/guardians. We will also be using bilingual staff members to support parents during school conferences, when available. Direct Instruction cost: • Teachers- $55.23 • Guidance-$59.38 • Supervisors- $56.79 Budget Allocation • 60% direct to instruction • 10% to parental involvement • 10% to professional development • 20% Other than Personnel Services Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: Rationale: The Title III Professional Development is structured to provide all teachers and staff with ENL training. The training will focus on identifying and using data to differentiate for ENL students. Teachers are also trained by a Literacy Specialist in basic literacy skills in order to better support their ENL students in the content-area classes. Two of the PD sessions will be led by representatives from the Bronx FSC and a third PD session will be run by a Literacy Specialist and will focus on helping teachers with compliance with the Dignity for All Students Act. Teachers to receive training: Workshops in ENL support and methodologies are for the entire staff, as everyone works with ENL students. Those who will be in attendance are administration, subject-area teachers, paraprofessionals, counselors, special education teachers, psychologists, speech therapists, secretaries, and parent coordinators. Schedule and Duration: 2018-19 SCEP-FL 59  Part C: Professional Development Training and workshops will be ongoing throughout the year, including during grade-level meetings, common-period planning periods, and on professional development days. The PD sessions are scheduled through the Bronx FSC throughout the school year and also on the Chancellor's PD days in January 2017 and June 2017. These PD sessions will be run by the Bronx FSC. Each session will last approximately three hours. Topics to be covered: Professional Development sessions will provide teachers will ENL training in the following areas: ~ Differentiating for ENLs ~ Using NYSESLAT data to drive instruction ~ RTI for ENLs in the high school setting ~ Reading and writing strategies for ENLs ~ ENL student profiles to better inform teachers of student needs ~ Scaffolding techniques for the content-area classes - Compliance with the Dignity for All Students Act These trainings will be provided by our ENL teachers in-house and by the support team at the Bronx FSC at no cost. Trainings will also be provided by Agiri Learning Associates, with costs to be paid by Title III funding. PD Sessions take place each week on Fridays, from 2:19 to 3:39 PM. Names of Providers: Administrators: Ivan Yip, Tanisha Shields ENL Coordinator: Quetzal Rodriguez-Thier Literacy Coach: Ryan Espeut Model Teachers (Ryan Espeut, Shamika Powell, Kristopher Johnson, Elizabeth Siriotis, Emma Carcamo) Bronx FSC Personnel (Janet Vasquez) Agiri Learning Associates (Ms. Maria Akinyele) Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: Rationale: In order to get more involvement from parents of ENLs, the parent coordinator and ENL coordinator run events and workshops throughout the year open to all parents. Schedule and duration: We address the needs of parents on a one-to-one basis and in small group settings where information is disseminated and there is an opportunity for Q and A. The activities are also held 2018-19 SCEP-FL 60  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities in locations and times throughout the year that are most convenient for the parents to maximize attendance and participation from the surrounding community. These events will coincide with parent-teacher conferences on March 26 and March 27, 2015, and May 7, 2015. Parents also have the ability to attend monthly meetings on the second Thursday of every month where they are informed of the calendar of school events and receive information about outside community resources that are available to them. These sessions will last approximate one hour. The open-door policy of the school is designed to encourage as much participation from parents as they desire when following up on the progress of their children, including the use of an online grading system through which parents can monitor the progress in real time. Topics to be covered: The parental workshops are designed to allow parents to better support the academic development of the ESL students. Most workshops focus on college readiness among students and cover topics such as preparing the common application, obtaining financial aid, and visiting colleges outside of the NYC area. Workshops will also include information about how parents can best help students with their coursework outside of the classroom and further developing literacy skills in both their first and second languages. - Workshops will be held each month on Saturdays (the first and third Saturday of the month), from 9 AM to 1 PM - Costs for the workshops (per session, supplies, food, etc.) will be applied to Title III funds Names of Providers: Parent Coordinator: Mohammed Kamara School Counselors: Merlen Locke, Kriston Jackson, Ernest McDuffie, Keisha Lawrence and Harold Corporan (bilingual counselor) (paid through non-Title III per session funds) ENL Coordinator: Quetzal Rodriguez-Thier Administrators: Courtenay Fortune, Tanisha Shields, Ivan Yip How parents will be notified of these activities: For all events, whether organized by the school or the Parents Association, invitations by phone and by mail are made well in advance in order to allow for increased parental attendance. In addition, all Title III documentation for parents is provided in both English and their native language to support their participation in and understanding of the services that are supplied for their children. We will also be using the messaging apps Kinvolved, Remind and the online program Skedula/Pupilpath. These parent activities align to the instructional goals of Title III programs by ensuring that support is provided to both students and parents because educating our children includes educating our parents--the more support we have from parents, the more successful our students will be, and when the support for our parents results in increased parental involvement, this inevitably leads to increased student achievement. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 61 Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. N/A Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits) N/A  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 SCEP-FL 62  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 09 School Name Bronx Leadership Academy High School Borough Bronx School Number 525 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Ivan Yip Coach type here ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Quetzal Rodriguez-Thier Teacher/Subject Area Janelle Manson / ESL Teacher/Subject Area Faith Lee / ESL Related-Service Provider Superintendent Carron Staple Assistant Principal Tanisha Shields Coach type here School Counselor Harold Corporan Parent Kenia Escoboza Parent Coordinator Mohamed Kamara Field Support Center Staff Member Richard Petrone Other (Name and Title) type here C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 0 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 4 1 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] D. Student Demographics 2018-19 SCEP-FL 63  Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 0 Total number of ELLs 86 ELLs as share of total student population (%) % Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): n/a If yes, indicate language(s): n/a Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 1 0 0 0 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 4 0 0 0 3 0 0 0 2 0 0 0 5 0 0 0 6 0 0 0 7 0 0 0 8 0 0 0 9 0 0 0 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? N/A 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? N/A 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? 2018-19 SCEP-FL 64  The success of our program is mixed. In terms of inclusion and recognition, ELLs are fully integrated into the school’s mission and activities. Programming decisions are made according to a student’s language proficiency and extra support is given as mentioned above. Administration and focus groups like the Inquiry Team and the RTI team use NYSESLAT scores, Regents exams, credit accumulation, and graduation rates among ELLs in order to ensure that they are receiving the necessary support services to attain success in the high school setting. The school often struggles to meet the AYP for Hispanic males, a subset of the ELL population in the school, and therefore the school often provides them with additional, targeted support to ensure that they meet the requirements of graduation. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? We provide targeted tutoring after school and on Saturdays to support our ELL students. We also have certified ENL teachers push in to core content area classes to support our ELL students. Four of our ELA teachers are currently enrolled in a TESOL extension program with Lehman College to further support the ELL students in their classes. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] N/A 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. Across the grades, the lowest scores were generally in reading. In reading, the students struggled with vocabulary, identification of the main idea and making inferences. They also brought little prior knowledge of the topics tested. Many students improved on their organizational skills in order to write structured essays for the exams. Speaking and Listening continue to be strengths since we have very few recent immigrants. The school as a whole emphasizes oral presentations, rigorous research, and debates to develop students use of academic language. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? We have weekly department meetings facilitated by ENL teachers and weekly bulletins sent out by the Principal. The AP of Supervision for Humanities will also meet regularly with the faculty to share the information and make adjustments as required. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. a. Instruction is delivered in a stand-alone ENL classes by ENL teachers and three additional certified ENL teachers working in conjunction with members of the English department. The school uses a non-grade-specific, homogeneous program model where the students are placed into ENL classes by their proficiency levels. The levels are determined by NYSESLAT proficiency levels and the RNMR report from ATS. Currently, we have two Entering/Expanding double period classes and two single periods of the Transitioning/Advanced level. Additional support will be provided by ENL teachers pushing in to content-specific classrooms. b. TBE program. If applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 65  N/A c. DL program. If applicable. N/A 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? Currently, all Entering and Emerging students receive 245 minutes of Stand-Alone ENL instruction and 245 minutes of Integrated ENL/ELA instruction, which includes a double-period block that is mixed with both levels of students. Entering students also receive 245 additional minutes of Stand-Alone ENL. Those Emerging students that are upperclassmen also have a separate ELA class that provides them with 2 units of ELA instruction in a mainstream classroom. Transitioning and Expanding students receive 245 minutes per week of Integrated ENL/ELA instruction and 245 minutes per week of ELA instruction in a mainstream classroom. Push-in services and tutoring are provided for all ELLs and former ELLs who have difficulties in their content-area classes. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. The content areas are delivered in English by certified teachers who have received training in ENL methodology. Content-area teachers collaborate with ESL teachers on a weekly basis at PD grade-level meetings as well as informally. ENL teachers reinforce content material through the SIOP or shelter English method of instruction. Extensive use is made of graphic organizers, KWL charts, outlines, visuals and video, as well as collaborative group work by the content area teachers to assist students in their focus on non-fiction texts in order to more closely align to the Common Core Standards. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? When new students enter the school and are identified as ELLs, Spanish-speaking students are formally interviewed by the certified bilingual guidance counselor to determine their native language abilities. Students are also given reading and writing diagnostics in their native language when available. Students are also given access to Regents Exams (excluding the English Comprehensive Regents) in their native language. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status Differentiated Instructional Approaches for ELL subgroups: a.SIFE Students For SIFE students, high interest novels are provided as reading materials. They also work on their native language literacy skills in the ENL class. We offer explicit ENL literacy skills and instruction (sheltered instruction, paired work, homogeneous grouping and visual aids, activating prior knowledge). They also have access to graphic text books that are used for instruction in literature, history and science. SIFE students are instructed in the same manner as long term ELLs otherwise. See below. b.0-3 Years. Students are paired with bilingual paraprofessionals when possible. They are also provided with leveled work, such as high- interest, low-level readers that are grade appropriate. They work on vocabulary development and translation from native language to English. They work on developing their listening and speaking skills as well. ENL teachers coordinate with content- 2018-19 SCEP-FL 66  area teachers and help them develop scaffolded activities: templates for writing, audio books, bilingual dictionaries, testing accommodations and after-school tutoring. For ELA classes, books in translation have been provided for students when possible. During high-stakes testing periods, students are tested in separate locations, given extended time and provided with bilingual glossaries where available. Exams are also administered in their home language when available, and if requested. c. 4-6 years. For these students, there is more focus on reading and writing. A balanced literacy approach is used. In-class time is spent on independent and guided reading. Students work on analysis of literature with close reading assignments, journal writing, scaffolded essays that mimic Regents essays and NYSESLAT writing assignments. We incorporate small-group work based on ability level. Academic language and vocabulary in Regents directions are directly taught in preparation for Regents exams. After-school tutoring and mock Regents exams are offered to prepare them for exams, and to allow teachers to give the students one-on-one feedback on the deficiencies they need to work on in their writing. During high stakes testing periods, students are tested in separate locations and given extended time. d. Long Term ELLs For long-term ELLs who are in need of ENL services because of truancy or poor attendance, collaboration with attendance teachers and the guidance department is used to set up interviews with the families to discuss long-range plans, which may include counseling, credit recovery programs, transfers to alternative settings and to GED programs. Long-term ELLs, who do attend school regularly receive instruction that targets literacy skills explicitly. Teachers administer diagnostic tests such as periodic assessments to identify areas needing improvement. Students in collaboration with their teachers set reading and writing goals and develop a process for monitoring progress. Students work on paraphrasing; they use graphic organizers to compartmentalize information for the purpose of determining importance and synthesizing information. They are also required to write paragraphs and essays after focusing on close readings of fiction, non-fiction and current events. The writing process, peer editing, and templates for Regents essays are used. Students are encouraged to use the habits of effective readers, such as to read and reread, participate in think-alouds, discussions, and group work. The long-term ELLs in our school place mostly in the Transitioning level or the Expanding level. Efforts are made to have students reflect on their own language learning process and experience and discover ways to improve. During high-stakes testing periods, students are tested in separate locations, given extended time and provided with bilingual glossaries. State exams in their home language are offered when available, and if requested. e. Former ELLs During high-stakes testing periods, students are tested in separate locations, given extended time and provided with bilingual glossaries. State exams in their home language are offered when available, and if requested. For at least two years following the school year in which a student is exited from ELL status, former ELLs receive targeted instruction from their content area teachers who work in collaboration with the ENL teachers. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? Teachers of ELL-SWDs initially rely on the Common Core Standards and Regents Exams to determine grade-level appropriate materials and skills to focus on in the classroom. Teachers then use a variety of research-based scaffolding methods such as CALLA and sheltered instruction to deliver the materials in a way that makes the content and language accessible to students. Across the content areas there is a focus placed on reading and writing skills, as well as teaching the academic vocabulary that ELL-SWDs need to understand and complete the materials given to them. The use of graphic novels, audio books, visual textbooks, physical manipulatives, and technology such as Promethean boards are used in the classroom to aid teachers in differentiation of their content and delivery. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? 2018-19 SCEP-FL 67  At the school, an effort is made to place ELL-SWDs in the least-restrictive environment. The school follows an inclusion model with students mainstreamed into general education classes for most of their content-area classes. Teachers have grade-level and common-subject meetings at least once a week to meet and discuss effective instructional strategies and student progress in order to promote cross-content collaboration and uniformity among the subject-area teachers. Teachers also attend monthly Professional Development sessions given by the school's Literacy Coach. The school also offers an extended-day program three days a week for students that require extra support and tutoring in their classes. Classes with high concentrations of ELL-SWDs are also equipped with an educational support Paraprofessional that provides extra support in one-on-one and small-group settings. The school also has an offering of ICT classes that are co-taught by the content area teacher and a member of the Special Education department for students that require additional support in certain subject areas. The school has implemented the RTI framework in order to properly screen and identify the Tier 2 and Tier 3 students that are in need of academic and behavioral interventions. Most often ELL-SWDs are identified as those high-needs students and receive the appropriate in-class and supplementary interventions. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. In content areas of ELA, Math, Science, and Social Studies, beginning level ELLs receive a lot of modeling, graphic organizers, visuals, formulaic approaches, graphic textbooks, and content-area materials in their native language whenever possible as well as the assistance of bilingual paras when possible in their content-area classes. They are paired with another student who speaks their language and is proficient in the content area material. Bilingual dictionaries are made available. Supplementary materials in their native language are used when available such as supplemental math texts, Science materials, and graphic novels for Social Studies. Intermediate and Advanced level students are encouraged to use English dictionaries. They are given vocabulary development exercises. ELLs with special needs receive reinforcement in their ICT classes for Math and Social Studies where they are given opportunity and assistance in doing homework and work on basic literacy skills. Uniform assessments and mock Regents exams in the areas of Math, Science, and Social Studies are used to specifically target weak areas. Instruction is then focused on improving these areas in small group settings. Extended day tutoring, Regents coaching programs and Saturday programs are offered for ESL students to target their performance in ELA, Math, Science, and Social Studies. Partners such as Gear Up and Theatre Development Fund provide enrichment activities such as books, theater plays, community service activities, and college trips. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? We are considering putting ELLs in targeted homerooms so that no student falls through the cracks. ENL personnel and content area teachers will receive more training in Sheltered Instructions methods for use in their classrooms. The school is also in the process of creating a Spanish literacy Saturday Academy program that will target long-term ELLs that are not literate in Spanish in order to improve their native language literacy skills. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? N/A 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. ELLs are not segregated in our school. Notifications of special programs and activities are sent home in English and the students’ native language. ELLs are present in all instructional after-school programs, such as extended day tutoring, as well as all extra- curricular and enrichment activities. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. In ENL classes, students are taught using various fiction and non-fiction novels from the English Language Arts curriculum and Shining Star texts for beginning level students. NYSESLAT preparation materials from Attanasio & Associates and Pearson are also used. Students are also exposed to various forms of technology (Promethean boards, NEWSELA, Castle Learning) and 2018-19 SCEP-FL 68  taught basic computer literacy skills such as Microsoft Word and PowerPoint. Dictionaries and glossaries (when available) are used in the content area classes. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? For those students that are literate in their native language, they are offered enrollment in a Native Language Arts course for Spanish-speaking students as well as novels and other content area materials in their native language when available. Students also have access to the Regents Exams in their native language when available. For those students that are not literate in their native language, most support is offered in the form of bilingual support staff that can provide translations and explanations orally to students. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. All required services and resources are in alignment with students’ ages and grade levels. The incoming Freshman students, especially those that also have an IEP, are given the highest level of support within the school. Those students are given the accommodations mandated in their IEPs and given the correct hours of ENL instruction. They are also further supported by the school through the school's summer bridge program, after-school tutoring, and Saturday programs. As students gets older, they are given more targeted support in order to support them in their Regents exam and meeting the requirements for graduation and beyond. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? In ENL classes, students are taught using various fiction and non-fiction novels from the English Language Arts curriculum and Shining Star texts for beginning level students. NYSESLAT preparation materials from Attanasio & Associates and Pearson are also used. Students are also exposed to various forms of technology (i.e. SMART Board and ELMO) and taught basic computer literacy skills such as Microsoft Word and PowerPoint. Dictionaries and glossaries (when available) are used in the content area classes. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). Newly enrolled ELLs are mandated to attend our summer orientation program. Bilingual support staff is made available and teachers monitor students to identify strengths and weaknesses so that students are appropriately placed in September. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? Spanish language classes and Native Language Arts for Spanish-speakers are offered to ELLs. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? N/A Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? 2018-19 SCEP-FL 69  Workshops in ENL methodology are offered on our professional development days for administration, subject area teachers, paraprofessionals, counselors, special-education teachers, psychologists, speech therapists, secretaries, and parent coordinators. Subject-area teachers also receive training by the ENL coordinator during weekly departmental meetings. The ENL coordinator also receives support in instruction and compliance issues from the network specialist. Administration, subject area teachers, paraprofessionals, counselors, special education teachers, secretaries, and the parent coordinator are notified of off-site workshops and seminars offered by education schools, the Department of Education, BOCES and the BFSC. Our Project Inquiry team has targeted ELLs for investigation and has identified and shared information with the whole staff at faculty meetings. The information is used to inform instructional practices. Conclusions from the data will be applied to similar populations which will result in an increase in differentiated instruction. The goal of Project Inquiry is to assist a greater number of ELL students to accumulate credits, develop academic language proficiency and transition out of ENL the program. 2. All teachers in the school are provided with bi-monthly professional development sessions given by the school’s literacy coach on implementing the Common Core Learning Standards in the classroom. The school also has a Reading Specialist on staff that provides the ESL and content-area teachers professional development sessions on various literacy strategies to help support struggling readers and writers in the classroom. All teachers are also required to attend outside Professional Development sessions about the Common Core Learning Standards at various points throughout the year and then come back to the school and turnkey the skills they acquired to the rest of the staff. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. Teachers have access to the proficiency levels and exam histories of incoming ELL students that will be placed in their classes. The ENL coordinator also attends department meetings at the beginning of each year to provide teachers with student profiles and uniform approaches to use with students to help ease their transition into high school. School leadership and guidance counselors, using input from subject-area teachers, have used the RTI framework to screen and tier students in order to identify the ESL students that require extra interventions and support in their transition into high school. Those students students requiring extra interventions are then presented to the staff along with an academic and behavioral intervention plan for teachers to follow with ENL students. Guidance counselors attend off-site professional development sessions provided by the Department of Education in order to assist ELLs as they transition to high school Training given to teachers includes an overview of basic ESL key terms and programs. Teachers are then provided with student profiles that are characteristic of the problems and strategies that should be used for students at every ability level. Teachers also have the ability to bring in their own lesson plans and teaching materials and work one-on-one with the ESL teacher to add modifications and differentiate their materials for the ESL population. Agendas and attendance are kept by the ENL coordinator. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? Each fall the school holds a parent orientation night. Parents have the opportunity to meet with the teachers individually. Letters containing the goals of the program, language development progress, and language proficiency assessment results are given to parents at this time. Paraprofessionals are available for translation as needed. Parents have the opportunity to express concerns and share information about their students at this time. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 70  2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. There is a vibrant School Leadership Team as well as a parents’ organization. Translation services, materials in Spanish and orientation sessions are offered to parents at all meetings. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. n/a 2018-19 SCEP-FL 71 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Ivan Yip, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 72  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: Bronx Leadership Academy HS School DBN: 09x525 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Ivan Yip Title Principal Tanisha Shields Assistant Principal Mohamed Kamara Parent Coordinator Quetzal Rodriguez-Thier ENL/Bilingual Teacher Kenia Escoboza Parent Quetzal Rodriguez-Their/ENL Teacher/Subject Area Janelle Manson / ENL Teacher/Subject Area n/a n/a Coach Coach Harold Corporan School Counselor Carron Staple Richard Petrone N/A N/A N/A Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Director of ELL services Other N/A Other N/A Other N/A Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 6/28/17 6/28/17 6/28/17 6/28/17 6/28/17 6/28/17 6/28/17 n/a n/a 6/28/17 6/28/17 6/28/17 n/a n/a n/a 2018-19 SCEP-FL 73 2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools School Name: BRONX LEADERSHIP ACADEMY HS Superintendent: CARRON STAPLE DBN: 09X525 The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Mohamed Melida Kamara Arias Parent Coordinator Yes Community Associate No Yes Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. To assess the language preferences of our parent community for both written and oral communication, we use ATS reports such as the Home Language Report and the Supplemental Translation Allocation report, as well as the Home Language Survey. We provide translators when necessary and when possible to help parents understand what they are being asked. Upon entry into the school, we determine the home language as indicated by the parent, student and any documentation they bring, after which we have the family sit with our Pupil Personnel Secretary, our School Nurse, and the School Counselor who will be assigned to work with the student (based on grade level/cohort). Where appropriate, all documents are then provided in the parents' language of preference. Where translation is required during in-school meetings (e.g., during academic conferences, attendance 2018-19 SCEP-FL 74  conferences, Open School Parent-Teacher conferences, PA meetings, etc.), we provide a translator for our parents when available, 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Spanish English Afrikaans French Twi Arabic Fulani Mandinka 267 301 3 3 2 1 1 1 46.11 51.99 0.52 0.52 0.35 0.17 0.17 0.17 269 298 3 3 3 1 1 1 46.46 51.47 0.52 0.52 0.52 0.17 0.17 0.17 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. n/a Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families Entitlement Letters are distributed at the beginning of the year September 2017 Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. Materials will be translated into the appropriate languages using the NYCDOE's translation unit as required, as well as staff members who are able to translate where appropriate. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 75  Extracurricular Program Information are distributed before the programs begin Testing Documents are distributed weeks before the exam dates Course Syllabi are distributed at the beginning of the year Letters from School Leadership are distributed multiple times throughout the year Progress Reports are distributed multiple times per year Newsletters are distributed monthly monthly Calendars are distributed at the beginning of the year Parent-Teacher Conference Announcements are distributed during the month before conferences September, October, March, May Every 6 weeks, starting in October 2017 Materials will be translated into the appropriate languages using the NYCDOE's translation unit as required, as well as staff members who are able to translate where appropriate. Materials will be translated into the appropriate languages using the NYCDOE's translation unit as required, as well as staff members who are able to translate where appropriate. Materials will be translated into the appropriate languages using the NYCDOE's translation unit as required, as well as staff members who are able to translate where appropriate. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to Parent -Teacher Conferences (Fall and Spring); Back-to-School/Meet & Greet Night (beginning of the school September/October 2017 provide interpretation service(s)? During community forums and parent-teacher conferences, staff will be used for translation services, as 2018-19 SCEP-FL 76  year); academic-concern conferences (throughout the school year); will the DoE's translation services unit (phone access) March/May 2018 Attendance-concern outreach (throughout the school year); monthly Attendance teacher home visits (for chronic absentee students, throughout the school year); weekly as needed School Counselor conferences weekly as needed Staff members and the NYC DoE's over-the-phone translation unit will provide necessary translations Staff members and the NYC DoE's over-the-phone translation unit will provide necessary translations Staff members and the NYC DoE's over-the-phone translation unit will provide necessary translations 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. We will use Kinvolved and Pupilpath, which have the ability to translate messages into a variety of languages. We also have staff members able to translate over the phone as needed. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. At the beginning of the year staff meeting, we provide staff members with all required Chancellor's Regulations and review the regulations with staff members. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) The school utilizes official translations available on the DoE's website for parental notifications. We also have access to teachers, staff and parent volunteers through the Parent Association that provide translation services for written and oral communication with parents. We have also posted the language translation unit phone number and provided 2018-19 SCEP-FL 77  all teachers with the information. The use of Kinvolved, Remind and Skedula/Pupilpath, which have the ability to translate into a variety of languages. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? Feedback will be gathered through the NYC School Parent Survey and through SLT and Parent Association meetings and community forums that will be held throughout the school year. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 78 
