2018-19 SCHOOL COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (SCEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 07X527 School Name: BRONX LEADERSHIP ACADEMY II HIGH SCHOOL Principal: ROSE LOBIANCO 2018-19 SCEP-FF 1  School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) Section 4: SCEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 SCEP-FF 2  School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information Bronx Leadership Academy II 07x527 320700011527 9-12 School Number (DBN): 730 Concourse Village West, Bldg A, Bronx, NY 10451 718-292-7171 Phone Number: 718-292-2355 Fax: Rose LoBianco rlobian@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Geographical District: 07 Email Address: Rose LoBianco TiffaniBranch EmyeeGarcia AlidaVarinos EmyeeGarcia TBD TBD na District Information Richard Cintron Superintendent: Richard Cintron, 335 Adams Street, Brooklyn, NY11201 Superintendent’s Office Address: RCintron@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718-923-5124 Phone Number: 718-923-5124 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) 2018-19 SCEP-FF 3  Affinity FSC: Executive Director’s Office Address: Alexandra Anormaliza Executive Director: 131 Livingston St AAnorma@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 212-374-0507 Phone Number: Fax: 2018-19 SCEP-FF 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the SCEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Rose LoBianco TiffaniBranch EymeeGarcia Chad Scott TBD TBD AlidaVarinos TBD EmyeeGarcia Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CSA/Assistant Principal UFT/Guidance Member/Parent 2018-19 SCEP-FF 5  Name Denise Hollensworth Nancy Hernandez YsabelPeguero Chad Scott AneetraBeaulieu Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Member/Parent Member/ Parent Member/Parent DC 37/Community Assoc Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ 2018-19 SCEP-FF 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the School Comprehensive Educational Plan The School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) is a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. The process of developing and implementing the SCEP is aligned to the Framework for Great Schools. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding SCEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and informed by New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department has established programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students supports to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and SCEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint for continuous improvement that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to increase student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a 2018-19 SCEP-FF 7  comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five (5) goals and action plans that align with the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. Accountability Tools and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is informed by the New York State Education Department’s (NYSED) Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) Tenets, the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Rubric, School Quality Guide and other quantitative and qualitative data tools. NYSED’s Six DTSDE Tenets To strengthen the existing system, the NYSED has developed a tool that captures the best practices from each of the current tools called the Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness. This new tool encompasses multiple instruments such as interviews, classroom observations and surveys. The protocol will begin with a clear and cogent statement of the optimal conditions of an effective school and the instruments comprising the protocol will measure how close or far away a particular school is to the optimal conditions identified. Once reviewed, the school and district will create a strategic plan to address the areas in need of improvement. All current Priority and Focus Schools and Focus Districts must use the tool; districts that are required to submit District Comprehensive Improvement Plans and Comprehensive Educational Plans also will use the tool. The DTSDE protocol includes a rubric, which identifies clear and coherent expectations of the optimal conditions of an effective school and school district across the following six tenets:  Tenet 1: District Leadership and Capacity  Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions  Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support  Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions  Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health, and  Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality 2018-19 SCEP-FF 8  Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The 2017-18 Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) I. II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Structures for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the SCEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the SCEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. Next Steps for SCEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: In Part 1A of the Section 5: Needs Assessment indicate the Statement of Practice (SOP) from the DTSDE Tenets that will be addressed in the action plan. Schools that received an Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) School Review should use the recommendations from the review to select their SOPs. Schools that did not undergo an IIT review should select SOPs informed by the major findings/recommendations from your most recent Quality Review (QR) or Central-led Review (CLR), and other qualitative and quantitative data. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 9   Step 4: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 5: Build consensus around activities, strategies and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 6: Implement at least one USDE Turnaround Principle (e.g., redesign the school day, week, or year; modify the instructional program to ensure it is Evidence-based, rigorous, and aligned with State academic content standards; provide time for collaboration on the use of) beginning no later than the 2018-19 school year.  Step 7: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 8: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 10  Section 4: SCEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Our core beliefs are centered around our mission, which reads: Engage Minds, Develop Leaders, Explore Possibilities. Our goal is to meet students at their levels and prepare them academically for careers and college by graduation. We want our students to find a sense of purpose and place in the world, and to see the connection between school and the real world. We aim to build relationships that develop our students into leaders and assist them in meeting their full potential in college and in their chosen careers. Note: In order to model the professionalism we believe essential for our students' success, all students at BLA II wear a school uniform. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. We are also very to have a multitude of strong partnerships focused on literacy (English and Math), college and career readiness, academic support, leadership, socio-emotional support and community building. These partnerships include:  Blue Engine: We are in the fifth year of our partnership. Each year, after an extensive review of our date, we are strategic in our placement of Blue Engine Teaching Assistants (BETA's). This placement is significant for several reasons: our emphasis on literacy, our need to increase our College Readiness rate and the fact that we administer the ELA Regents at the end of our 10th grade. Thus, all 10th grade ELA classes will be supported by a team of teaching assistants to reduce the teacher-to-student ratio to 1:7. This team works in close collaboration with our ELA teacher. BETA's work for Americorps and then have the option of taking on a second year to lead a BETA team and start the teacher certification process. iMentor: We have partnered with iMentor and can provide each student in all of our current cohorts with a mentor from New York City who has graduated from college. These mentors remain with students throughout their four years of high school and communicate with them virtually and via monthly after school sessions at BLAII. We are part of an evaluation program for iMentor who is tracking this work and the impact it has on student performance and personal growth. More information can be found at: www.imentor.org .   Advanced Placement for ALL: We have increased our course offerings to 2 from 5!  Student Success Center: Through a partnership with Eastside Settlement House we are fortunate to provide our students additional support services pertaining to post-secondary education. The college office on campus provides students with workshops, applications support and trips to a wide range of schools that meet students needs and goals. Single Shepherd Initiative: Through this initiative we have retained the services of four Shepherd Social Workers in addition to our current Student Services and Guidance Department staff. Our partnership allows us to provide each cohort of students with a dedicated social worker to provide for greater individualized support around social-emotional needs.   Peer Group Connection: PGC is a mentoring program whereby a select group of our 12th grade students mentor all of our 9th graders via the assistance of a comprehensive curriculum and set of protocols that facilitate reflection, social-emotional growth and community building across the school.  buildOn: A community-based organization grounded in community service and service learning activities provides on-site coordination that engage students in a a number of events during the course of the year.  Here to Here: Internship program offering hands-on career readiness for rising Juniors and Seniors.  Big Brother and Big Sister: Provides our 12th grade students with the opportunity to participate in an internship in a corporate setting.  Network for Teaching Entrepreneurship (NFTE): An international non-profit organization providing entrepreneurship training and education programs to young people from low-income urban communities. We offer coursework and entrepreneurship opportunities to our senior students via a trained pedagogue and around specific curriculum.  Montefiore Hospital: Provides medical and mental health services and community resources . 2018-19 SCEP-FF 11  This year we solidified several of the systems we have had in place as a staff, particularly in the area of instruction. All Assistant Principals are involved in instruction and are expected to visit classrooms and utilize the Danielson Framework for Teaching to support our Instructional Focus and to strengthen pedagogical practice across classrooms. Assistant Principals participate in all Department and Grade Teams meetings wherein members collaborate on analyzing school-wide data, establishing concrete goals and next steps around strengthening unit plans, and honing in on Common Core Learning Standards underscored by outcomes of individual and subgroups of students. We are very proud to have expanded our Teacher Leadership Pathways through the hiring of two Peer Collaborative Teachers and one Master Teacher who will serve to strengthen our already strong collaborative environment. They will open their classes as lab classrooms, offer coaching to our teachers, facilitate Professional Development and guide Teacher Leaders in facilitation. We have also maintained a Teacher Leader position entitled Professional Development Liaison (PDL) who works closely with administration and teachers alike in differentiating professional development learning opportunities for staff and in ensuring we meet and exceed our instructional goals as we support teacher practice and student learning. Additionally, we provide on-site support for our new teachers, through a new teacher liaison and individual mentors. Together, we will work to refine our purpose as a school, rebuild a shared vision, and refine how we work to make our school-wide values a reality for students and staff alike. Additionally, we established a position for a teacher programmer in order to expand our programming capacity and better meet the needs of an increasingly diverse group of students. A review of the 2017-2018 data and feedback from stakeholders has resulted in a series of very targeted and strategic programming decisions around:  Programming collaborative time within the daily and weekly schedule for teachers to design curriculum and lesson plans;  The programming of ENL teachers to provide additional support as co-teachers in our ELA classes based on our ENL students' proficiency and grade levels;  The creation of additional pathways in mathematics and science as well as the increase of opportunities for students, particularly our on-track Juniors and Seniors, to obtain college credit in high school through NYCDOE's Advanced Placement for All and College Now's programs at Hostos Community College. We have also expanded our elective offerings for upperclassmen through the creation of coursework pertaining to Entrepreneurship and Leadership and through the piloting of the Here to Here Internship program;  The hiring of additional Special Education, Social Studies and Math teachers in order to reduce class sizes, enhance coursework progression models, and facilitate an increase in the supports and accommodations that we can provide for our SWD's and ENL students in the "high need" content areas of Global History, Algebra and English Language Arts;  The hiring of the aforementioned additional Social Studies teachers supports our new pathways in Social Studies;  The hiring of an additional Arts teacher with a focus on dance and music allows for the expansion of our Arts program;  We have maintained the position of an IEP teacher who responsibilities include working with specified students to provide AIS to pre-referral students;  Continuation and enhancement of teacher leader positions across the content areas;  The strategic placement of our Blue Engine Teaching Assistants (BETAs) in our 10th grade ELA classes;  Our investment in various on-line platforms such as i-Learn to support students in the development of literacy skills and to provide varied options to meet and exceed standards in content area courses with substantive interaction with teachers. All of our students are enrolled in a weekly College and Career Seminar wherein they learn about the various college and university options afforded them, the skills needed to meet with success in their post-secondary experiences and the successful completion of the various steps of the application process. Two teachers are assigned to specific grades: one works exclusively with 9th grade students while the other follows students from 10th to 12th grade. This second teacher gains a deep and unique insight into each student, their families, their goals and their needs that allows him to write college counselor recommendations, identify post-secondary institutions that meet specific goals and needs and help students and families through the various step-by-step application processes. We capitalize as a community on his work by further messaging to students about the importance of achieving the CUNY College and 2018-19 SCEP-FF 12  Career Readiness benchmarks in ELA and Math. Students are encouraged to attend tutoring to prepare for and re-take examinations and achievements are celebrated. Our College and Career Readiness levels increased from 13% two years ago to nearly 27% during the 2016-2017 school year, as per the 2017 School Dashboard, and we are on track for similar increases. . 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. We are a High School located in District 7 in the Bronx with a population of approximately 550 students. About two-thirds of our students who matriculate in 9th grade are in the city’s lowest third based on 8th grade assessments. Our population currently consists of 27.16% of students with special needs and 13.31% of students who are English as a New Language Learners. Additionally, 60.4% of our teachers do not yet have tenure, and this year, we have hired 6 new classroom teachers and one IEP Teacher. The hiring of additional Special Education, Math and Social Studies teachers in order to facilitate an increase in the supports and accommodations that we can provide for our SWD's and ENL students in the "high need" content areas of Global History, Algebra and English Language Arts. To create a safe learning environment and to ensure that we are meeting the social-emotional needs of our students, we have expanded programs throughout the day and after school. Our Restorative Justice Program provides a holistic approach to behavioral change and student accountability for actions. Our Peer Group Connection program offers a leadership curriculum and skills for our 12th grade mentors and the benefit of mentoring services for our 9th graders from their older peers. Our after school program, entitled Scholars, is replete with tutoring, athletics, arts, theatre, health activities, and college assistance. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. The 2017-2018 School Quality Guide reveals that our school has achieved excellence in Collaborative Teachers and has made gains under Rigorous Instruction, specifically in the areas of “Shift in Literacy and Math,” “Course Clarity,” and “Academic Press.” Teachers have the opportunity to collaborate and develop, grow and contribute to continuous improvement of the school community.  93% of teachers say that they design instructional programs (for example, lessons and units) together.  90% of students say that at their school teachers make a conscious effort to coordinate their teaching with instruction at other grade levels.  93% of teachers say that they talk with one another about instruction. Additionally, the 2017-18 School Quality Guide reports that:  91% of students say that they see people of many races, ethnicities, cultures, and backgrounds represented in the curriculum.  94% of students say that their teachers treat students from different cultures or backgrounds equally.  97% of students say that their teachers respect their culture or background. Our Department Teams refine and focus their inquiry work on curricular improvements, and our Grade Teams shifted to focus on what students are doing in the classroom and in the focus around Common Core Learning Standards, shifts in alignment with curriculum and our Instructional Focus and consideration of the inclusion of culturally responsive curriculum. Dedicated time for teams is built within our daily and weekly schedule and distributive leadership is evident through teacher leader facilitators across Department and Grade teams, and in Peer Collaborative Teachers. Our Instructional Focus seeks to increase student learning and engagement via discussion and writing around text, the use of academic vocabulary and the making of connections to bigger understandings, along with student self-assessment inside the classroom. Through this Focus we anticipate that more students will consistently earn credits, 2018-19 SCEP-FF 13  specifically those in 10th and 11th grades where data indicates a decrease in credit accumulation in core subject areas. Herein we reference the 2016-2017 School Quality Report which indicates the following: Credits Year 1 81.5% 108 Credits Year 2 77.4% 127 Credits Year 3 68.2% 119 In order to support the Instructional Focus so that it will have an impact on credit accumulation and Regents pass rates, we have embarked on the process of refining our curriculum. Our Department Teams are strengthening units by aligning their thought and planning processes with those set forth by McTighe and Wiggins' Understanding by Design model to develop enduring understandings, essential questions and performance tasks in alignment with standards. Each team is working on prioritizing and selecting Common Core Literacy Standards applicable to each grade's curriculum and spiral said standard(s) into the content areas. Teams are also honing into lesson-specific strategies around our five Instructional Drivers: Questioning, Tasks with texts, Discussion, Multiple Access Points, and Self-Monitoring by Students. 5. Identify at least one USDE Turnaround Principle (e.g., redesign the school day, week, or year; modify the instructional program to ensure it is Evidence-based, rigorous, and aligned with State academic content standards; provide time for collaboration on the use of data) to be implemented in the 2018-19 school year. not applicable 2018-19 SCEP-FF 14  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 07X527 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 09,10,11,12 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 513 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 15 14 4 12 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 51 49 1 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 94.0% % Attendance Rate 91.6% % Reduced Lunch 17.3% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.4% 69.0% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 1.4% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 3.14 6% 26% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation 74% 63% 71.0% 4.0% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) No N/A 154 137 83.4% 2.7% 26.7% 27.5% 1.0% 1.2% 6 17% 5.9 N/A N/A 85% 69% 71.2% 16% N/A No Yes Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No No Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups Hispanic, ED, Hispanic Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A NO N/A N/A NO Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A NO N/A N/A NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A YES N/A YES YES N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A NO N/A N/A N/A N/A NO YES N/A N/A N/A YES 2018-19 SCEP-FF 15  2018-19 SCEP-FF 16  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 3 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 3.2 The school leader ensures and supports the quality implementation of a systematic plan of rigorous and coherent curricula appropriately aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS) that is monitored and adapted to meet the needs of students. Teachers develop and ensure that unit and lesson plans used include data-driven instruction (DDI) protocols that are appropriately aligned to the CCLS and NYS content standards and address student achievement needs. The school leader and teachers have developed a comprehensive plan for teachers to partner within and across all grades and subjects to create interdisciplinary curricula targeting the arts, technology, and other enrichment opportunities. Teachers implement a comprehensive system for using formative and summative assessments for strategic short and long-range curriculum planning that involves student reflection, tracking of, and ownership of learning. 3.3 3.4 3.5 SOP(s) Addressed X X na X Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Areas of Strength: The 2017-18 School Quality Guide indicates a score of 3.67 for Academic Press. This is 3% above the borough and citywide average. This coincides with a score of 4.00 in Common Core Shifts in Literacy supported by 82% of students saying that teachers want them "to become better thinkers" and "not just memorize things." This too is 3% above the borough average and 2% above the citywide average. Under Indicator 1.2 Teacher Pedagogy in the 2017-2018 School Quality Review Report it states, "In most classrooms visited, teachers provided visuals and scaffolds for students at all ability levels to promote their being highly engaged in learning. Across classrooms, students had structured opportunities to work on their own or with their peers to build critical thinking skills through problem-based instruction." Under the School Measures of Leadership Practice (MOLP), our areas for improvement include the need to deepen student consistent access to engaging and rigorous Common Core-aligned tasks across classrooms and vertically aligned across grades and subject areas. It was noted that high level critical thinking was varied and inconsistent based on grade band standards. Hence, units of study need to be consistently monitored to ensure alignment with the school's 2018-19 SCEP-FF 17  curricular and pacing calendars as well as the expectation that all students have opportunities to share their thinking with their peers through daily speaking and writing activities. Areas of Priority June 2018 Regents results reveal that that there is a gap between students earning credits and those passing Regents examinations. This area that will be addressed further in the Goal and Action Plan for this Framework element. June 2018 Regents results data is reflected below:  English Language Arts: 76/210 = 36.2%  Global History Transitional: 60/162 = 37%  US History & Government: 71/144 = 49.3%  Algebra 1 CC: 64/167 = 38.3%  Living Environment: 57/140 = 41% We will be working closely with our Grade and Department Team facilitators to ensure alignment of Standards with objectives, learning tasks and assessments while we strengthen coherence and connections to bigger understandings in the units. We seek to create units that are dynamic, living documents that change according the findings in student work, formative and summative data, and inquiry work. We hold ourselves accountable for the process of providing consistent peer and administrative feedback on units. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, as a result of teachers' collaborative work around vertical alignment, the appropriate adaptation of content standards and CCLS, and the alignment of learning progression between units and lesson plans, specifically in terms of Objectives, Learning Activities and Assessments, there will be a 2% increase in the pass rate of each core Regents examination. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 18 Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Teachers Sept. 2018-June 2019 AP Supervision, Dept Team Leaders Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Use weekly Department Teams' professional learning time to strengthen Unit Plans by developing common components such as Enduring Understandings, Essential Questions, and Assessment and evaluate said Unit Plans through Cycles of Inquiry, inter-visitations and the analysis of student work and formative/summative data. a. Incorporate multiple forms of assessment through which students can demonstrate mastery of content and skills; b. Include opportunities for engaging, relevant/real world tasks, specifically in the form of end-of-unit summative performance tasks; c. Ensure that Essential Questions are aligned with shifts in Common Core Learning Standards; d. Determine two vertically aligned skills which are emphasized within each subject area. Train and support Department Team Leaders in facilitation and grow their knowledge of curriculum development and content expertise through: Team Leaders Sept.2018-June 2019 Ap Supervision, Principal  Partnering with New Visions Curriculum Experts across subject areas;  Having Teacher Leaders participate in literacy instruction for ENL students;  Having Peer Collaborative Teachers work with Teacher Effectiveness Unit. Other Professional Development around Rigorous Instruction specifically questioning, discussion, writing based on text, the use of academic vocabulary and self-assessment strategies. Weekly Department Team meetings will conduct periodic data reviews and analysis as part of the inquiry cycle, with particular emphasis on sub-groups (ENL's and SWD's). Grade and Department Teachers Sept. 2018-June 2019 AP Supervision 2018-19 SCEP-FF 19  Teams will work in tandem to identify skills to be vertically aligned across grade levels and strategies to diminish gaps. Common planning times have been built into teacher schedules so that teams can collaborate weekly on the curricular and grade level. In order to build teacher capacity, teacher facilitators lead each team. Hiring of one Peer Collaborative Teacher to support collaboration and teacher lesson planning for alignment with CCLS, our school's Instructional Focus and the goals set forth in the SCEP. This work will be futher supported by information gleaned from the analysis of student work and inter-visitations around lesson study. Resources have been aligned to include curriculum planning by Grade and Department Teams after school hours for our teachers. Teachers Sept. 2018-June 2019 AP Supervision Assistant Principals and Principal will conduct frequent observations and provide timely feedback to teachers to assess effectiveness of alignment of standards in unit plans, while providing weekly monitoring and oversight of the team meetings, agendas and deliverables. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Teachers Sept. 2018--June 2019 AP Supervision and Principal How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Parents are invited to our Monthly PA meetings wherein curricular resources are explained and shared. Throughout the year, we have Curriculum Nights when families can meet directly with teachers and Saturday Parent/Guidance Counselor events when they engage one-on-one with counselors. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. School leader use of resources: allocated funds for supplies, books, teacher per session and per diem substitutes for off-site PD. Funds are being set-aside each trimester to support Blended Learning opportunities after school PCT Teacher has been relieved from 1 teaching period to coach and to observe new teachers. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA X P/F Set-aside 21st Century X C4E 2018-19 SCEP-FF 20  Title I 1003(a) Title III PTA Funded SIG Grant School Achievement Other Funding Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, there will be a 3% increase in students passing Regents aligned Interim Assessments. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. New Vision Student Sorter, Interim Assessment results, Scholarship Reports, and ultimately, June 2019 Regents data. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 21  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 5 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 5.2 The school leader establishes overarching systems and understandings of how to support and sustain student social and emotional developmental health and academic success. 5.3 The school articulates and systematically promotes a vision for social and emotional developmental health that is aligned to a curriculum or program that provides learning experiences and a safe and healthy school environment for families, teachers, and students. 5.4 All school stakeholders work together to develop a common understanding of the importance of their contributions in creating a school community that is safe, conducive to learning, and fostering of a sense of ownership for providing social and emotional developmental health supports tied to the school’s vision. 5.5 The school leader and student support staff work together with teachers to establish structures to support the use of data to respond to student social and emotional developmental health needs. x x x x SOP(s) Addressed Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? Areas of Strength: Our 2017-18 School Quality Guide revealed that:  83% of students feel safe outside around their school.  88% of students feel safe traveling between home and their school.  93% of students feel safe in the hallways, bathrooms, locker rooms, and cafeteria.  94% of students feel safe in their classes. The 2017-2018 Quality Review Report Indicators 1.4 and 3.4, which both reflect School Culture, were given the rating of "Well-Developed." NYC School Survey further supports this as Supportive Environment 74% 2018-19 SCEP-FF 22  Areas of Priority: Support Staff (Guidance Counselors, Deans, Parent Coordinator, etc.) need to collaborate with teachers to establish structures to support the use of data to respond to student social and emotional developmental needs. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools –Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, as a result of an expansion of both rigorous and Culturally Responsive Curriculum and social-emotional support services for students, there will be a 2% decrease in chronic absenteeism as measured by data.from Kinvolved, JumpRope and the PADS reports from ATS. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 23  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change that address one or more of the USDE Turnaround Principle(s) described in the SCEP Overview Section, if applicable. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Hiring of four Social Workers (Single Shepherd Initiative) who will be assigned to a specific cohort to support the social emotional, behavioral and attendance needs of students. Administration and Social Workers will monitor data each Marking Period. Guidance Counselors will work on the programming of students and assist with the mandated counseling and the monitoring of attendance. Designated Social Workers will perform mandated counseling and the monitoring of attendance (e.g. chronic absenteeism). Partnership with NYC Men Teach will support the development of curriculum and pedagogical practices in alignment with Culturally Relevant Education as well provide coaching, resources and relevant services to our school. Continue our partnership with the Center for Collaborative School's Peer Group Connection which affords mentors to our 9th grade students in the form of a group of select 12th graders. Guidance Staff September Principal 2018 to June 2019 Assistant Principal of Student Services Guidance Staff September Principal 2018 to June 2019 Assistant Principal of Student Services Guidance Staff September Principal 2018 to June 2019 September 2018 to June 2019 Assistant Principal of Student Services Principal Assistant Principals Administrators Teachers Counselors Support Staff (Deans, Paras, School aides) 3 Teachers Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) September 2018 to June 2019 September 2018 to June 2019 Principal Assistant Principals Principal Assistant Principal Coordinator Offer a full after school program that provides students a safe place to study, interact with others, and become involved in sports and the arts until 5:45 pm five days a week. Students Teachers 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 24  Our school structure supports daily conferences with parents via our Deans' Team, Counselors, Grade Team of Teachers and our Administrative teams. Parents are involved with Peer Group Connections through several Family Nights wherein they participate in activities that enable them to understand the supportive environment of our school. Our Parent Coordinator is instrumental in sharing this vision of our school and in maintaining the positive support system for our parents. She organizes all of our Parent Meetings and is integral in communication via KINVOLVED, phone calls, email and participation in parent/ teacher/administration meetings. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. We have allocated funds for per session for after school events, per diem substitutes as needed for teacher PD, and educational consultants. We have allocated funds for updating technology, books, Summer Bridge, and software.xc We have allocated funds to support a new, in-house managed after school program that provides for academic support and extracurricular enrichment. We fund a Program Coordinator, teachers for tutoring and school support staff to enhance academic and sports activities. Supervisors will also be maintained to monitor the program. We have allocated funds to support the per session and planning needs of the Peer Group Connection. We have allocated funds to support the classroom component of the Peer Group Connection for three teachers. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, there will be a 1% decrease in the number of students arriving late to first period from the from the September 2018 to February 2019. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. ATS reports, Kinvolved data, Jumprope data. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 25  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 4 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 4.2 School and teacher leaders ensure that instructional practices and strategies are organized around annual, unit, and daily lesson plans that address all student goals and needs. 4.3 Teachers provide coherent, and appropriately aligned Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS)-based instruction that leads to multiple points of access for all students. 4.4 Teachers and students work together to implement a program/plan to create a learning environment that is responsive to students’ varied experiences and tailored to the strengths and needs of all students. SOP(s) Addressed x x na 4.5 Teachers inform planning and foster student participation in their own learning process by using a variety of summative and formative data sources (e.g., screening, interim measures, and progress monitoring). Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. x 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Areas of Strengths: Based on the 2017-2018 Quality Review Report:  Teachers work in teams to thoroughly examine their teaching practices, share knowledge and strategies through reflective practice for improving pedagogy and student learning across the school.  Distributed leadership structures are evident throughout the school. All staff members assume responsibility for collectively improving teacher practice and student performance. Teachers play an integral role in high-level decisions about student learning. Supporting Evidence 1. Teacher teams are engaged in ongoing phases of inquiry work involving data collection and analysis, lesson review, implementation of instructional strategies and intervisitation. Teachers revise the curriculum including curricular maps, unit plans, lesson plans, and assessments. 2. Protocols are utilized to look at student work and analyze student formative and summative classroom data as well as Regents data. Lead teachers and other teachers are assume the role of facilitators. 3. The practice of conducting lesson studies has been implemented to connect inquiry work to classroom practice. This further encourages the collaboration of teachers through visiting classrooms to observe the delivery of a 2018-19 SCEP-FF 26  co-developed lesson. The analysis of resulting student work products subsequently takes place and leads to the identification of the high leverage skills required to improve student work. Areas of Priority: We recognize the need to continue to increase opportunities for productive struggle for all students in our classes as well as increased opportunities to develop literacy skills through our Instructional Focus that targets classroom practices such as discussion and writing based on text(s), the use of academic vocabulary, the incorporation of complex texts and making of connections to larger conceptual understandings. Teacher teams will take the following steps this year to consistently include:  More in-depth analysis of tasks and assessments to ensure for vertically aligned skills.  Explore and implement varied co-teaching models.  Utilize protocols around looking at student work.  Utilize protocols around analyzing data and the item analysis of Regents questions.   Including culturally responsive strategies. Increased inter-visitations. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, teacher collaboration around the revision of lesson plans to include our instructional drivers (teacher questioning, student-to-student discussion, task with text, scaffolds and student self-monitoring) will result in increased access and higher levels of engagement for all students, including SWD's and ENL's, as measured by a 2% increase in graduation rate over 2017-18. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 27  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Promote the engagement of teacher teams during our weekly, structured professional time to make stronger connections to school-wide goals, analyze data, share student work, and refine and adjust curriculum, lessons and pedagogical practices. Teachers September 2018 to June 2019 Principal, Assistant Principal, Programmer, Facilitators Time will be allocated for teachers to meet in departments each Wednesday after school with a focus on lesson planning and refinement around uniform practices inclusive of our five drivers, tasks and assessments around vertically aligned skills, appropriate co-teaching models, and culturally responsive strategies. Meet bi-monthly with Grade and Department Team leaders to guide the practices around inquiry, inter-visitation, curriculum planning and professional development. Teachers and Administrators September 2018 to June 2019 Principal, Assistant Principals Offer monthly professional development opportunities both on-site and off-site for our teachers through New Visions, AP for ALL, Affinity, Borough Field Center, ENL instruction around writing Teachers September 2018 to June 2019 Hire two Peer Collaborative Teachers to promote effective instructional practices that are beneficial to diverse groups of students. PCT's support their colleagues through focused coaching, intervisitation, and the designing of meaningful opportunities for professional growth. Peer Collaborative Teachers September 2018 to June 2019  Coordinate Inter-visitations  Coach and reflect on instructional drivers and practices through structured conversations  Create Professional Development opportunities  Host lab classrooms Principal Assistant Principals, Teacher Leaders Teachers Principal Assistant Principals Monitor JumpRope to more closely ensure alignment to the grading policy and utilizations of multiple forms of assessment so that students are afforded the opportunity to demonstrate mastery of content and skills through various means (and for students to be able to monitor their progress). Administration September Principal 2018 to June 2019 Assistant Principals 2018-19 SCEP-FF 28  Strengthen the monitoring of teacher team agendas and minutes by principal and assistant principals each week during Cabinet Meetings to ensure that rigorous inquiry is occurring during teacher team meetings and that these meetings result in measurable pedagogical improvements and curricular refinements across all content areas. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Team Leaders Teachers Principal Assistant Principals Teacher Leaders Principal and Assistant Principals September 2018 to June 2019 Programmer How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Parent involvement and the engagement of families to support their understanding of collaborative teacher strategies occurs from the moment students are accepted into our school. Our Summer Bridge Program introduces families to our teams and the systems and structures around staff and teacher collaboration. Parents can meet with teachers to learn about strategies via Grade Team Meetings, Saturday Academies, Curriculum Night and Family Night. Our Parent Coordinator is instrumental in sharing this vision of our school and in maintaining the positive support system for our parents. She organizes all of our Parent Meetings and is integral in communication via KINVOLVED texting, phone calls or email. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Funds used to support teacher team leaders around curriculum, lesson planning and professional development. Funding for per diem for off-site teacher PD particularly around co-teaching. Funding for texts for book student. Funding for the PCT. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) Title I SWP Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School X Achievement Funding X C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 29  By February of 2019, the Progress to Graduation Tracker will reveal that there will be a 2% increase in students who will graduate in June 2019. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Student work products in discussion and writing; Interim Assessments; Mock Regents; Advance data, New Vision tools. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 30  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 2 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 2.2 The school leader ensures that the school community shares the Specific, Measurable, Ambitious, Results-oriented, and Timely (SMART) goals/mission and long-term vision inclusive of core values that address the priorities outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP). Leaders make strategic decisions to organize programmatic, human, and fiscal capital resources. 2.3 2.4 The school leader has a fully functional system in place aligned to the district's Annual Professional Performance Review (APPR) to conduct targeted and frequent observation and track progress of teacher practices based on student data and feedback. 2.5 Leaders effectively use evidence-based systems and structures to examine and improve critical individual and school-wide practices as defined in the SCEP (student achievement, curriculum and teacher practices; leadership development; community/family engagement; and student social and emotional developmental health). x x x x SOP(s) Addressed Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Areas of Strength: Examination of 2017-18 findings stated that "school leaders consistently communicate high expectations for instruction and student progress through emails, newsletters, and one-on-one conversations. School leaders and staff consistently communicate expectations connected to college and career readiness to families. The impact is that the structures that are in place offer support and effective feedback, which result in a culture of mutual accountability for staff and students to meet the school-wide expectations." The School Quality Guide indicated that 97% of families say that the principal encourages feedback from the community and them through regular meetings, which was well above both the borough and city-wide averages. Creative programming has enabled the strengthening and enhancement of pathways towards graduation and additional meaningful and rigorous coursework for all students. Areas of Priority 2018-19 SCEP-FF 31  Areas of growth include improved oversight and monitoring of the instructional planning by team leaders and within teacher teams. Thus, as a whole staff, we expect to examine data in relation to credit accumulation, graduation, Regents outcomes, Scholarship, and Interim-Assessments, as well as Regents Item Analysis data in order to make connections to inquiry work and our school-wide goals. We also honed in on achievement data from the June 2018 Math and ELA Regents as our average score on ELA was 58.4, sixteen points below the city-wide average, and on Math we remained at an average score of 66, two points below the city-wide average. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART– Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. During the 2018-2019 school year, the hiring of additional teachers in math, social studies and special education, the strategic placement of Blue Engine Teaching Assistants (BETA's) in Grade 10 ELA classes to create an increased ratio of adults to students, and the use of evidence based systems to differentiate instruction for individualized learners, will lead to a 2% increase in the number of students passing the English Language Arts Regents and Algebra 1 examinations with an emphasis on our ELL and Special Education subgroups. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 32  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Hire an additional Social Studies and Math teachers as well as two additional Special Education teachers to help to reduce class sizes. Teachers Hire two Peer Collaborative Teachers, bringing our total to three, to support teacher lesson planning, coaching and inter-visitations in alignment with CCLS Standards, our School's Instructional Focus and the SCEP. Teachers Carefully analyze Scholarship and Regents data to appropriately program ENL teachers to support the differentiated needs of students. Teachers - Each ENL teacher follows a grade level to compliment their instructional strategies in both the stand-alone and co-taught classes and to address the specific academic expectations of individual cohorts. - ENL students are programmed by their proficiency levels in ELA classes to increase teacher capacity for differentiation. Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) September 2018 t June 2019 September 2018 to June 2019 September 2018 to June 2019 Principal Assistant Principals Principal Assistant Principal Principal Assistant Principals Teacher Leaders ENL Teachers Principal Assistant Principal Teacher Leaders Principal Assistant Principals Develop and enhance internal leadership pipelines for teachers in the form of Curriculum Leaders, Grade Team Leaders, Professional Development Liaisons, and Mentors. Teachers September 2018 to June 2019 September 2018 to June 2019 Partners Parents Students Partnerships:  The strategic placement of Blue Engine Teaching Assistants (BETA's) in ELA classes maintains academic support for our students in Grade 10 ELA classes.  Maintenance of i-Mentor and the Student Success Center for our college preparation and planning and their collaborative with our college advisers.  Maintenance of Peer Group Connection for peer-to-peer mentoring for our 9th graders.  Establishment of a partnership with Here to Here to offer students coursework in alignment with CDOS and ELA standards as well as greater opportunities for internships during the year and summer. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 33   Provide increased opportunities for students to participate in AP for All coursework and campus-wide coursework opportunities and provide teachers more rigorous professional development. Strengthen the monitoring of teacher team agendas and minutes by principal and assistant principals to ensure that rigorous inquiry is occurring during teacher team meetings and that these meetings result in measurable pedagogical improvements and curricular refinements across all content areas. Teachers Teacher Leaders September 2018 to June 2019 Principal Assistant Principals Continue to support team leaders in communicating with and messaging school vision to teachers teams through weekly meetings, emails and professional development sessions. Team leaders Sept 2018 to Principal June 2019 Assistant Principals Engage new and experienced teachers in targeted professional development opportunities. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Parent involvement and the engagement of families in supporting their understanding of collaborative teacher strategies occurs from the moment students are accepted into our school. Our Summer Bridge Program introduces families to our team and the systems and structures around staff and teacher collaboration. Parents can meet with teachers to learn about strategies via Grade Team Meetings, Saturday Academies, Curriculum Night Family Night and Parent Association Meetings. Our School Leadership Team is continually apprised of all programmatic and leadership strategies and is involved in the decision-making around them. Our Parent Coordinator is instrumental in sharing this vision of our school and in maintaining the positive support system for our parents. She organizes all of our Parent Meetings and is integral in communication via KINVOLVED, phone calls, email and participation in parent/ teacher/administration meetings. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Funds have been allocated to support the role of the Professional Development Liaison. Funds have been allocated to support team leaders’ after school activities and planning. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) Title I SWP Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding X C4E Other 2018-19 SCEP-FF 34  Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, there will be a 2% increase in the number of ENL and Special Education students who pass Regents-aligned Interim Assessments in ELA and Math, respectively. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Student work products and Interim Assessments Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 35  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 6 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 6.2 The school leader ensures that regular communication with students and families fosters their high expectations for student academic achievement. 6.3 The school engages in effective planning and reciprocal communication with family and community stakeholders so that student strength and needs are identified and used to augment learning. 6.4 The school community partners with families and community agencies to promote and provide training across all areas (academic and social and emotional developmental health) to support student success. 6.5 The school shares data in a way that promotes dialogue among parents, students, and school community members centered on student learning and success and encourages and empowers families to understand and use data to advocate for appropriate support services for their children. x x na x SOP(s) Addressed Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Areas of Strength: Our strength relative to this framework element is indicated by the data found in the 2017-18 School Quality Guide showing that  96% of families say that school staff regularly communicate with them about how families can help their child learn. (Q1a)  90% of families say that they get opportunities to visit their child's classroom, such as observing instruction or participating in an activity with their child. (Q1b)  99% of families say that they are greeted warmly when they call or visit their school. (Q1c)  96% of families say that teachers work closely with them to meet their child's needs. (Q1d)  98% of families say that they feel well-informed by the communications they receive from their school. (Q1e) The 2017-2018 School Quality Review findings illustrate the following as parents were interviewed by the reviewer and additional evidence was provided: "Parents receive information about their children's progress towards graduation. Parents stated that administrators and teachers focus on ensuring that their children complete all the requirements for their courses as well as supporting their 2018-19 SCEP-FF 36  long term college and career goals. Families are pleased with the initiatives provided, such as college trips that widen students’ options when making decisions about post high school goals. They feel supported in helping their children meet the high expectations that have been articulated by the administration. The parent coordinator, teachers, and guidance staff facilitate various workshops. Parents are provided tutoring in learning English to help them support students’ academic and social emotional achievement. Additionally, parents stated that because teachers update grades regularly, they have access to live information regarding their children’s progress. They praised the school’s guidance counselors and teachers for keeping them informed of the additional academic supports the school has made available for students." Areas of Priority Redefining and restructuring connections with our many partner and community-based agencies to promote and provide training across all areas (academic, social emotional developmental, personal health) to support student success. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. During the 2018-2019 school year, our collaborative work with our many school on-site and community-based partners will promote a greater connection with academic and social-emotional developmental resources to support student engagement in the school community as measured by a 2% increase in student attendance. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 37 Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) September 2018 to June 2019 Principal Assistant Principals l Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Use of Kinvolved and JumpRope, now integrated, as our main area of communication from school to home. a. Teachers will receive professional development on the use of Kinvolved and JumpRope systems and the means by which to effectively communicate with parents regarding the progress of their children (i.e. in home language, through attendance messages, etc.) and how to access relevant data and reports. b. During September and December Parent-Teacher nights and subsequent Parent Teacher Association Meetings, Kinvovled and JumpRope will be advertised and parents will be trained in the use of these platforms. c. Assistant Principal of Organization will review weekly and monthly reports to monitor staff usage of Kinvolved and share ongoing reports with staff. d. Parent Coordinator and other support staff will provide timely updates of parental/guardian contact information to DOE and school systems. Attendance Team, Guidance Counselor Teachers Survey parents to assess needs to ensure monthly Parent Association meetings are dedicated to particular themes and expressed needs. Parents September 2018 to June 2019 Parent Coordinator Guidance Team Use of AIDP funding to sustain an additional social worker to target students with chronic patters of absenteeism. Social Worker September Principal Community Partners Assistant Principal of Student Services will conduct weekly Attendance Meetings with support staff to review attendance data and note trends in order to generate a strategic plan for home visits, planning interviews and individualized outreach. Parents Partnerships and connections with Community-based Organizations and stakeholders will be strengthened through on-site coordinators Community Based 2018 to June 2019 September 2018 to June 2019 September 2018 to June 2019 Assistant Principal Principal Assistant Principal Principal Assistant Principal 2018-19 SCEP-FF 38  to promote and provide training and resources across all areas (academic, social emotional) to support student success. Organization Coordinators, Parent Coordinator Periodic data analysis along with weekly Grade Team Meetings will provide the systems and structures to monitor how this goal is being managed and met. Grade Team Leaders Sept 2018-June 2019 Principal, Assistant Principals 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. Blue Engine, i-Mentor, Student Success Center, Peer Group Connection, Here to Here, Big Brother/Big Sister, buildOn are major organizations for our school and support family and community engagement. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Funds have been allocated used to support software purchase of Kinvolved and JumpRope. Funds have been allocated for the position of a Programmer/Data Coordinator to oversee the JumpRop2018-19 SCEP-FF 39  e platform. Resources have been allocated for Partnerships, like Blue Engine, iMentor, Here to Here,and Student Success Center. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA X PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2018, after an analysis of ATS and KINVOLVED reports, there will be an increase in attendance by 2%. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Kinvolved and JUMPROPE Reports, increased attendance rate for students and increased attendance rate at parent meetings, ATS Reports Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 40  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) All of our 9th and 10th graders receive extra support in class. 11 th and 12th is determined by score on the ELA regents Reading level is used for remedial reading support. Then class grades determine students who need tutoring Mathematics 9 th and 10 th graders receive some kind of support across the board. Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Students are asked and encouraged to attend summer school if necessary. 9 th and 10 th Grade students have TA's in their classes through Blue Engine. Literacy prep courses and Humanities courses are offered during the school day to assist students in mastering skills and passing the ELA Regents exam for those who do not pass it the first time they take it. All of our 9 th graders are tested for reading level and several are then pulled into two reading classes or a humanities class for extra tutoring. There are TA's for in class tutoring in our Algebra and Geometry classes. Students attend target tutoring during the summer, Saturdays, and after school. We offer targeted classes for student who have not yet passed the Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) Small group in class, one-to-one, and tutoring. When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Students are asked and encouraged to attend small group instruction before, during and after the school day. Small group in class, one-to-one, and tutoring Students are asked and encouraged to attend tutoring before, during and after the school day 2018-19 SCEP-FF 41  Science Class grades determine tutoring. Liv Env. Scores determine who needs remediation in 11 th grade. Social Studies Regents scores At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Students with IEP mandated counselling. Those with attendance between 59-85%, and those who have been referred to guidance Regents during the day. The Honor Society offers peer tutoring for all students. Students are asked and encouraged to attend a targeted tutoring after school, on Saturdays and over the summer. A Living Environment Prep courses is offered to all students who have previously failed the Living Environment Regents exam. Peer tutoring. Students are asked and encouraged to attend a targeted Credit tutoring after school, on Saturdays and over the summer. A regent based/preparation course was created for students who are struggling to pass their history Regents Exams One on one counseling and group counseling. Especially for those students failing more than one class, with high absentee rates, and/or discipline issues. Targeted counseling for chronically absent students through an AIDP grant and Counseling in Schools Small group, one-to-one, and tutoring. Students are asked and encouraged to attend tutoring before, during and after the school day. Small group, one-to-one, and tutoring. Students are asked and encouraged to attend tutoring before, during and after the school day. Small group, as well as 1-1 During the day 2018-19 SCEP-FF 42  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 20 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. Providing student with necessary resources to be successful: school supplies, uniforms, transportation Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). na 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 43  na 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. na 2018-19 SCEP-FF 44  Section 8: Title I Program Information Directions:  All schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. We created a rigorous interview process with set questions each attached to indicators that demonstrate the criteria that our school believes is necessary to be successful with our students. We use many of the best practices documented by The New Teacher Project, (TNTP) and work with TNTP consultants to ensure we hire the best teachers possible for our school. These include various retention strategies such as Professional Development, Leadership positions, positive feedback, team –teaching, for our strong teachers. We use an early notification system to identify future vacancies to start looking for candidates as early in the school year as possible. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the strategies and activities for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, staff, and paraprofessionals that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). We offer our teachers many off-site professional development workshops, including many offered by Teachers College, College Board Advanced Placement, New Visions, DOE, Uncommon Schools, and others. In addition our teachers meet weekly in department and grade level teams as well as one on one with an administrator. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. na 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). na 2018-19 SCEP-FF 45  Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/information, early intervention services, etc.). n/a 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. Our school is organized in both horizontal and vertical teams of teachers. Each team has a leader who meet with APs/Principal each week for communication and input on various decisions. In addition we use google forms to gather feedback from professional development and other staff events. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds enables, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (SCEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Title I Part A (Basic) Title I School Improvement 1003(a) Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funds Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 425,286 70,086 0 12,366 0 3,575,773 X X X X Column B Section Reference(s) 5A,5B,5C,5D,5E 5C,5D 5C 5A,5C,5D 2018-19 SCEP-FF 46  1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I School Improvement 1003(a): To support implementation of school improvement activities identified through the Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) reviews or a school review with district oversight and included in the DCIP/SCEP.  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: To support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs.  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 47  Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan.  Title I Priority and Focus School Parent Engagement Set-aside: Additional set-aside is to enable greater and  more meaningful parent participation in the education of their children. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.  Grant funds awarded via a competitive process, including Title I 1003(g) SIG funds: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 48  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent Involvement Policy (PIP) Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. Bronx Leadership Academy II, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students Bronx Leadership Academy II will support parents and families of Title I students by: 2018-19 SCEP-FF 49  ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; Parental Involvement and School Quality In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability grade-level curriculum and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, Progress Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; 2018-19 SCEP-FF 50  ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Every Student Succeeds Act; ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings, with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between /teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand School-Parent Compact (SPC) School-Parent Compact (SPC) Bronx Leadership Academy II , in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the No Child Left Behind (NCLB) Act, is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards and Assessments. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 51  On average 4 out of 10 students that start high school in the Bronx will not graduate. There are many things that can prevent a student from earning their high school diploma. As you start your high school career, we want to make you a promise. You will graduate from high school and be accepted to college. You will receive scholarships, grants, and loan offers to pay for college. We will do everything in our power to insure this guarantee.* Ensure that curriculum I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Offer opportunities to demonstrate leadership and community service in and outside of the classroom ● Provide counseling and mediation services to help students in crisis ● Ensure the safety of every student from bullying, threats, or fear of violence ● Provide make up credit and test prep classes during summer school ● Listen to and address your needs, concerns, and problems I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff Our school has an open door policy as parents can meet with Parent Coordinator, Front Office Staff, Administration and Grade Teams of teachers. ● Offer all NYS requirements for graduation in 4 years I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents ● Provide before school, lunch time, and after school tutoring ● Offer challenging and engaging classes designed to meet and exceed the minimum requirements to graduate ● Give regular and specific feedback about your progress towards college readiness ● Help you set and prepare for your college and career goals ● Attend Parent-Teacher Conferences in both the Fall and Spring II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● Attend at least 2 Parent’s Association meetings per year ● Maintain up to date contact information with the school ● Ask your student what they learned in each of their classes every day ● Make arrangements that allow you to come to the school when your child is in crisis ● Create quiet space in the home for your child to complete homework ● Schedule your child’s appointments to minimize school absences (afterschool, during school holidays, etc) 2018-19 SCEP-FF 52  ● Speak with your child’s guidance counselor at least once a year to discuss your child’s progress towards college readiness ● Attend parent workshops (i.e. FAFSA) when provided ● Make sure student gets at least 6 hours of sleep per night ● Check student’s grades once per month with report cards, progress reports, or online grade book III. Student Responsibilities ● Attend school everyday unless an illness would endanger your safety or the safety of others ● Arrive at school no later than 8:20 am everyday ● Attend afterschool, before school, or lunch time tutoring at least once a week ● Attend PM, Saturday, or Summer School when assigned ● Follow all school rules and procedures without protest ● Treat your peers and staff with respect at all times ● Actively participate in class (Ask questions, volunteer, listen, write, etc) ● Alert your teacher when you do not understand what you are asked to do ● Complete all assigned classwork, homework, and assessments to the best of your abilities ● Be open and honest with yourself and staff about your needs and struggles 2018-19 SCEP-FF 53 Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components: 1. 2. 3. The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers. Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. 1. 2. 3. 4. High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” 1. Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences. Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. 1. These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 3 9 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 5 11 12 2018-19 SCEP-FF 54  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the · · · · · · rationale subgroups and grade levels of students to be served schedule and duration language of instruction # and types of certified teachers types of materials Begin description here: After School Program Based on our ELA Regents scores, we will be running an after school program that will provide our Entering, Emerging, Transitioning and Expanding-level students with additional exposure to the English language. Under the guidance of a certified ESL teacher, students in Grades 9-12 will read high interest, grade appropriate texts that expound upon content in the core subject areas. These students will be provided with individual conferencing and progress monitoring. Teachers will plan interdisciplinary trips for students to a myriad of historical and cultural venues to further support learning experiences in Global History, US History, Living Environment and English. These are subjects in which students have historically struggled to pass the Regents culminating assessment. Additionally, the teachers providing the services will collaborate with an Assistant Principal to receive relevant professional development as needed in the content areas and the development of applicable literacy skills and strategies. The ELA/ESL small group after school instructional program will run from October 2018 to June 2019, for a minimum of two days per week, two hours per day for approximately thirty-two weeks. ESL teachers will be expected to reinforce literacy in the content areas as they support students' literacy development as co-teachers in ELA across the grade levels. Support staff will be on hand to make necessary outreach and speak to parents. Title III funding will pay the per session for the ESL Teacher and Supervisor. rationale teachers to receive training schedule and duration topics to be covered name of provider Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. · · · · · Begin description here: Our ESL staff has a diverse experiences and have been working in the field between two and five years; therefore, in order to meet their needs and the needs of our students, professional development needs to be differentiated, specifically around supporting content area teachers with implementing and developing ESL instructional strategies that will increase discussion and writing for all students. In order to achieve this expectation, · teacher to have a weekly one-on-one&nbsp;meetings to plan, discuss, and debrief high quality instructional practices and experiences for our ELL students. These workshops will begin in September 2018 and will continue until June 2019. · Cadell&nbsp;Hornbuckle and Robert James.&nbsp; · Leadership Academy II High School teachers and coach targeted staff.&nbsp; ESL teachers will Our Assistant Principal&nbsp;of Supervision and Principal have arranged for each Our ESL coordinator, Monique Cooper, will mentor our two other ESL teachers, Our newly hired Peer Collaborative Teachers and Master Teacher support all Bronx 2018-19 SCEP-FF 55  All teachers are involved in Inquiry Teams and look at ELL data across content areas and Part C: Professional Development work with these three Teacher Leaders during&nbsp;grade, department and faculty conferences around our instructional focus, specifically the scaffolds to support&nbsp;ELL instruction,&nbsp;differentiation in core subject areas, and preparing&nbsp;students for culminating Regents examinations.&nbsp;&nbsp; · grade levels.&nbsp; In doing so, they&nbsp;examine student work and data in an ongoing manner.&nbsp; · All teachers have received professional development on ELL proficiency levels and NYSESLAT&nbsp;testing in order to offer a more appropriately differentiated approach to teaching ELL students.&nbsp; · development&nbsp;around literacy development and our school's Instructional Focus that aligns with the expectations of the Common Core Learning Standards for reading, writing and discussion that includes complex text, academic vocabulary and connections to conceptual understandings.&nbsp; All teachers participate in both weekly one-on-one coaching workshops and weekly two-hour, after school department workshops each Wednesday from September to June. The presenters at weekly department workshops are various Teacher Leaders and Administration. Workshop titles tentatively include: · · · · · · · April&nbsp; · · Accessing student data and monitoring&nbsp;student behavior - September&nbsp; Exploration of our Five Instructional Drivers &nbsp;- October&nbsp; Unit Assessment Alignment - November&nbsp; Differentiation and Scaffolds - December&nbsp; Selecting appropriate grade level texts around tasks &nbsp;-&nbsp; January&nbsp; Engaging students in learning via discussion - February&nbsp; Establishing independent learners through student self-monitoring -March and Teachers across content areas will&nbsp;receive ongoing professional Planning and Preparation for Regents Assessments--May Assessment of Practice and Planning for SY 19-20--June rationale schedule and duration topics to be covered name of provider how parents will be notified of these activities Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. · · · · · Begin description here: Increasing parent engagement is of primary significance to Bronx Leadership Academy II High School (BLAII). Parents of ELL's will continue to have numerous opportunities to become involved in their child's education. Our Parent Association meets monthly in the evening. These meetings include translators for parents who do not speak English and topics relevant to upcoming events and the needs of parents. The Association and BLAII staff work in close collaboration with our Parent Coordinator, Betty Robinson. Parents are notified of meetings by mail, telephone and Kinvolved text messaging. All modes of communication are provided in English, Spanish and other languages as necessary. Parents may elect to serve on the School Leadership Team. Additionally, teacher teams frequently invite parents to meet with them both during and after school. Our ELL teachers provide additional opportunities each trimester for 2018-19 SCEP-FF 56  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities ELL parents to visit the school to focus solely on ELL instruction and compliance related items. Numerous other events beyond the aforementioned regularly scheduled meetings also occur to encourage parental involvement and engagement (i.e., Peer Group Connection Family Night, Talent Show, Awards Ceremonies and Open Saturday School with Counselors, etc.). Title III funding supports translation services at these events which are provided by our bilingual staff members. Additional bilingual staff members were hired to fully support and accommodate our ELL parents and are paid via other funding sources as well. . BLAII partners with a multitude of community-based organizations that provide services for parents and students. We have a longstanding relationship with Montefiore, which provide medical and mental health service to students and parents during the school and after the school day. Both organizations collaborate with our Parents' Association to deliver content relevant to community needs but are not funded through Title III funds. Our Parent Association President and Parent Coordinator survey parents annually to to evaluate their needs. Parent Association meetings, incentive programs, and other after-school activities are geared to meet the expressed needs of parents. Parent workshops are held on the third week of each month. Presenters include but are not limited to: · · · · · · · · Workshop titles may include: · · · · · · · · · ELL Parents are included in all activities. Translators are always provided and invitations are made in the parent's home language. Betty Robinson, Parent Coordinator Rose LoBianco, Principal Alida&nbsp;Varinos, Assistant Principal for Guidance David Buie, College Advisor Tyrone&nbsp;Jones and William Pagan, Guidance Counselors Social Workers Community-based Partners Other invited guests and speakers paid through other school funds. Resources and Housing Support: September&nbsp; Study Habits and Grading: October&nbsp; Curriculum Moving Forward: November&nbsp; Transcripts Support:&nbsp;December &nbsp; Applying for College: January &nbsp;&nbsp; FAFSA&nbsp;Assistance:&nbsp; March&nbsp; Partnerships and DOE Services: April&nbsp; Regents Guidelines: May&nbsp; Promotion in Doubt and Summer School: June Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. NA NA Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits) 1. 2. Purchased services Per session Per diem 2018-19 SCEP-FF 57  Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. NA 1. NA High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials 2. NA NA Must be supplemental. Additional curricula, instructional materials. Must be clearly listed. 3. 4. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA 2018-19 SCEP-FF 58  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 07 School Name Bronx Leadership Academy II High School Borough Bronx School Number 527 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Rose LoBianco Coach type here ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher William Pagan Teacher/Subject Area Emyee Garcia Teacher/Subject Area Betty Robinson Related-Service Provider Ana Vasquez Superintendent /Alida Varinos Assistant Principal type here Coach Monique Cooper School Counselor Jessica Mejia/Science Parent na Parent Coordinator type here Field Support Center Staff Member Juan Mendez Other (Name and Title) 3 C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 0 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification 0 Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 530 0 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics 2018-19 SCEP-FF 59  Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 91 Total number of ELLs Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): 17.17% ELLs as share of total student population (%) 0.18% K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Yes NoFreestanding ENL Yes No If yes, indicate language(s): SELECT ONEYesNo If yes, indicate language(s): SELECT ONEYesNo Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 School Year Opened (e.g., 2013-14) na Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Lang. na Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 1) Our school uses the Scantron performance series, the Wilson Reading Program and the Rewards Program to assess literacy levels. We have found that a majority of our students struggle with vocabulary presented in 0 passages. English curricula has been adjusted to put more emphasis on vocabulary, chunking text, non-fiction reading, along with particular scaffolds, like graphic organizers, visuals, sentences starters. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 60  0 0 0 Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 Additionally, teacher created diagnostics are given in each subject area which assist in guiding instructional planning for our ELLs. 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? Teacher common planning times are built into our daily and weekly schedules and are conducive for collaborative planning among general education and English as New Language teachers. We encourage capacity building of our teacher to become teacher leaders. Our ELL teacher has risen to the occasion and accepted the role . We have assigned the role of ELL Coordinator to one of our ELL teachers, who supports the curricular and compliance needs of our students and families. Assistant Principals and Principal work closely with the Coordinator in designing instructional practices and engaging in inquiry work that will support ELLs and monitor their progress towards the standards within the discipline. Teachers work closely with on-site professional development support from the Division of English Language Learners liaison on strategies around ELL instructional practices. Inter-visitations are also conducted. Teachers are afforded multiple opportunities for off-site professional development. Along with our programmer, administration and teachers look closely at data and design programming structures for our students to strategically place students and teachers in classes to support their language development. Last year, we hired an additional English Language Learner Teacher. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? We use students (teacher created diagnostic assessments, Interim assessments and each trimester and progress to graduation metrics (regents results, credit accumulation) as our primary evaluation of success. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? Grade Level and Curricular teams analyze the data to determine trends within the inquiry process so that resulting student work can be examined, targeted students are identified and instructional strategies are designed and implemented for student success. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? not applicable....as we are a high school. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] 2018-19 SCEP-FF 61  In addition to formative and summative classroom data, we use the multitude of assessments available to us, inclusive of 8th grade scores, NYSESLAT, Regents data and ELL data from the DOE. NYSESLAT data reveals that generally our students are more proficient with oral communication than with written. As a school we therefore focus a majority of our academic interventions on writing development. The ELL Data Analysis Tool (EDAT) is so advantageous in in this process as well. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. We disseminate this data through our weekly teacher team meetings - both Grade and Curricular teams, School Leadership Team, Parent Association, Guidance and Social Worker Team meetings and Administrative meetings. Administrators, ELL teachers and coordinators assist in this dissemination. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? There are 2 sections of standalone ENL offered at our school. One section is for 9 th and 10 th graders and the other for 11 th and 12 th graders. Both classes are focused on Entering and Emerging ENL students. Theses courses meet 5 periods/week. Integrated ENL is offered through co-taught instruction in 9 th , 10, 11 th , and 12 th grade ELA courses and in 10th and 11th grade Social Studies. In all 4 grade levels, there is one ELA certified content teacher. This past year, we have also had two co-taught ELL classes, one in 9th grade Living Environment and one in 10th Grade Global Studies in preparation for students' credit accumulation and the regents examination. All of our students have access to all after school and Saturday tutoring. We have a class d Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. N/A b. TBE program. If applicable. N/A c. DL program. If applicable. Instructional minutes for the proficiency levels are delivered as mandated by CR Part 154-2 English as New Language Units of 'Study and Staffing Requirements. All ENL classes, Integrated and Stand-Alone offer home language support. 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? Content area courses are taught with a sheltered English approach. Materials are made or modified by individual teachers to be accessible to students with limited English proficiency but relevant to CCLS course standards. ELL sheltered classes uses content material from a variety of courses to assist in content specific language acquisition in addition to providing instruction on the structure and mechanics of the English language. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 62  3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. At the onset of every school year, Assistant Principal and ELL staff meet with families to ensure that information on file is current. New students meet with same staff to appropriately evaluate the home language needs. Teacher in Grade and Curricular teams utilize student work products, formative and summative assessments to make further diagnosis and target progress or lack thereof to properly include interventions. Students are provided with translation materials whenever possible. Funding sources are utilized to purchase texts in alternate languages, glossaries, dictionaries, and applicable software. Teachers are given access to alternative language textbooks and regents review materials. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? a. Students with interruption in formal education are assisted in making the transition back to school in several ways. Students with low literacy levels ae enrolled in a small reading class. Otherwise they are placed in our ELL beginner class in order to receive further support. Our parent coordinator and attendance team work with families in obtaining any necessary supplies for school. b.Students are enrolled in a team teaching ELL push in content course depending on their current credits, with a content teacher and an ELL certified instructors for 60 minutes per day (300 minutes per week). Students are additionally enrolled in a sheltered ELL course to specifically focus on their reading and writing skills for 60 minutes per day (300 minutes per week). Push in classes are programmed heterogeneously by proficiency level but homogeneously by grade. Pull out classes are heterogeneous for grade and proficiency level but limited to no more than 2 contiguous grade levels. c. Developing students highest need is typically content vocabulary acquisition and content writing skills. ELL students are given programs and instruction relevant to their individual needs. Teachers work in grade level teams twice per week to identify student needs and share best practices to teach vocabulary and writing skills. d. FELLs continue to have access to native language materials in the content classes if requested, in addition to glossaries on tests. FELLs, along with advanced ELLs, have the option to join the after school English class for continued support. Additionally, they will continue to receive 120 minutes per week in integrated ENL with team teaching. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status There are a variety of instructional strategies and grade-level materials which our teachers use to provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English Language Development which is aligned with our Instructional Focus and consider multiple entry points based upon ELLs content and language proficiency. It is our goal to increase the content and language demand. Some examples include: Building on prior knowledge and experiences, planning purposefully explicit and implicit vocabulary and language instruction to build students’ academic language. Allowing students to interact with texts in a variety of ways and experience texts through multiple modalities. Grouping is another important instructional strategy as we develop ELLs’ language proficiency. For example, ensuring we provide opportunities for our ELL students to practice speaking and listening with 2018-19 SCEP-FF 63  English proficient peers or be paired with students who may share the same native language to support content and language acquisition. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? A variety of instructional models are used to ensure student success. ELL students are enrolled in team teaching classes in both their ELL and content coursework. Additional pull out instruction is provided by their ELL teacher.. Appropriate grade level materials are made available in all of these classes. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? Team teaching is used in ELA, Math, Science, and History to lower the teacher to student ratio for targeted students. Team teaching services are typically offered in English. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. We have partnered with the Blue Engine Teaching Assistants program to place college educated teaching assistants in every 10th grade ELA and 9th and 10th grade Math courses. This means that all 9th and 10th grade ELLs have student to staff ratio of no more than 5 to 1 in their math and ELA courses. We anticipate this will greatly improve their reading and writing performance. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? n/a 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? ELL students participate in all school programs. All students are invited to participate in extracurricular activities and this information is disseminated during club fairs at their lunch, over public announcements, and by flyers throughout the school. ELL students are offered after school tutoring in all content areas, and have access to Blue Engine Teaching Assistants during lunch and after school in ELA and Math. Our Saturday Program affords all students the ability to demonstrate mastery of standards and prepare for regents examinations. Particular trips are also offered to our ELL students in order that they develop literacy outside of the school setting in varying historical and cultural institutions throughout the city. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. Bilingual dictionaries, Rosetta Stone Language Software, Alternative language textbooks, and Edge Curriculum (for Intermediate and Advanced Students) 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. Native language support is provided by bilingual staff members and through partnering students with more proficient bilingual students. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Resources are purchased that are designed for use with high school age students, grade 9-12. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. Bilingual dictionaries, Rosetta Stone Language Software, Alternative language textbooks, and Edge Curriculum (for Intermediate and Advanced Students) 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? 2018-19 SCEP-FF 64  Prior to the school year new students are encouraged to attend a one week bridge program coordinated by our 9th grade teacher team and our community partner, buildOn. ELLs that enroll during the school year are introduced to the school by a collaboration of the guidance counselors, ELL coordinator, and their grade level teacher team and our Parent Coordinator. A family night designed to support our ELL families is hosted in the Fall and Spring Terms. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). French and Spanish. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? N/A 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? On and off-site Professional We have reached out to the Division of English Language Learners. ELL staff then provide ongoing PD for content teachers of ELLs, assistant principals, paraprofessionals, psychologists, secretaries, and parent coordinator. Specific PD titles and dates have not yet been made available by the city. 2) Teachers meet one period per week with their assigned supervisor to discuss curriculum plans, lesson plans and strategies aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards and how to continue to best support our ELL students in meeting these standards. This involves classroom observations, lesson study, lesson reflection, intervisitations, and reflection. Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? Teachers' grade level teams meet twice per week and they use an inquiry cycle approach to professional development. In order to ensure that time is allotted to improve instruction for ELL students, ENL teachers will choose more than 50% of their target students from the ELL population to ensure that their professional development is focused on ESL students. An ELL Coordinator and AP of Student Services have been assigned to convey significant information and ensure that staff are kept abreast of all CR Part 154.2 requirements. Additionally, Department Team blocks of time each week ensure that content area teachers learn from the lesson studies and an analysis of student work to refine and revisit classroom practices. This year, we collaborated with the Office of Ells and had a coach work on-site directly with teachers around strategies and practices to support multiple access points. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include 2018-19 SCEP-FF 65  how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. Our ESL Coordinator and ESL teachers meet with parents during Grade Team Meetings during the week and we host a fall and spring meeting in addition to all other parent meetings specifically for our ELL parents to provide more individualized attention to the services and translation needs. Counselors, teachers and administration take part in these meetings as well. Saturday Parent Events provide more in person parent/staff time to discuss goals, services and academic planning. It must be stated that we have Parent Orientation from the summer to familiarize our families with our school's services. In all cases mentioned above, staff versed in second language are readily available, materials are translated into varying languages, and DOE translation services are utilized as needed to ensure provision for interpretation and translation services for our families. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? Parent association meetings, family events and cultural events are scheduled monthly and with language translation provided directly by staff along with translatable materials. Parents are welcome to come into school daily to work collaboratively with the Parent Coordinator on school related functions. Parents are invited to take part in varying trips and college excursions. We have also hired staff who are proficient in numerous languages to support and facilitate this involvement and foster a more welcoming and inclusive environment for our families. Additionally, our many on and off-site partner organizations provide family events and services for our students within school and the community at large. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Paste response here: Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Bronx Leadership Academy II HS 2018-19 SCEP-FF 66 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, 07x527, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 67  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: Rose LoBianco School DBN: 1/1/01 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Alida Varinos Title Principal Betty Robinson Assistant Principal Monique Cooper Parent Coordinator ENL/Bilingual Teacher Jessica Mejia Parent William Pagan 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 Teacher/Subject Area Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach School Counselor Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 2018-19 SCEP-FF 68  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 07x527 School Name: Bronx Leadership Academy II Superintendent: Juan Mendez The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No *Betty Robinson Parent Coordinator Yes Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. Each year all students are required to submit a updated emergency contact card (aka blue card). The language preference information from these cards is updated in ATS. This ensures that our language preferences are updates at least annually. They are also updated if a parent calls to update their information mid year. We then download our schools language preferences report from the LAC resources page to drive the decisions on how school wide communications will be sent. Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey are on ATS which is reviewed by the Assistant Principal and ELL Coordinator. Our Parent Coordinator meets with parents and students as early as July for school year planning and counselors meet with students and parents at the onset of each year and on an ongoing basis during academic planning. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 69 Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Language Parent language preference is almost identical for written versus oral. 60% prefer English. 37% prefer Spanish. Less than 1% prefer: Albanian, Fulani, Hatian Creole, Mandingo, Nahuatl, Soninke, Twi, Wolof, ASL, and Zulu.1% prefer Bengali and French. 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency How do you Distributed to Families September - October plan to translate? Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. Assistant Principal of Student Services and teachers translate We meet weekly with our Parent Coordinator and Guidance Emergency Contact Information School Rules and Policies Uniform Description Field Trip Permission Slips Graduation Guidelines Report Cards and Transcripts School Calendar 2018-19 SCEP-FF 70  Parent Teacher Conference Schedule Letters distributed y the Principal or teachers Health Counselors in order to accomplish tasks and ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. Several weeks prior to PTC dates Ongoing DOE Translation Unit as necessary. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school 9 th Grade Summer Bridge Curriculum Night Fall and Spring Parent Teacher Conferences Monthly Parent Association Meetings plan to provide interpretation service(s)? Staff on site are versed in languages DOE Translation Unit as needed July September 2018-19 SCEP-FF 71  Annual Review of IEPs October and March Annual ESL Progress Conferences Monthly Guidance Counselor Academic Progress Meeting Saturday Parent Meetings As needed Fall and Spring trimesters Ongoing 1 - 2x per month 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. Kinvolved text messaging in varying languages, Phone calls, Home visits Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 72  At the onset of each year, at our Faculty Conferences, staff are provided information and an overview of Chancellor's Regulations. We also disseminate information to staff during our weekly Department and Grade Team Meetings, School Leadership Team Meetings are also another venue to review and familiarize all constituent groups to these policies and procedures. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) All parents are provided with the Bill of Parent Rights and Parents Guide to Language Access via in person and mail by the parent coordinator when their child enrolls in the school. The school has posted the welcome poster and Language ID guide at the entrance of the school building by the school safety desk. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? Parents are surveyed monthly at Parent Teacher Conferences by our Parent Coordinator and during the Fall and Spring trimesters as our ELL Coordinator and ELL teachers as they meet with parents to explain all available services. Guidance Counselors are continually meeting with parents during academic planning and Saturday Parent Events offer additional opportunities for The results of the survey are shared with school administration and guidance staff for programming and planning purposes. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 73 
