 11X542 School Name: PELHAM PREPARATORY ACADEMY Principal: BENVENUTO FERRON   Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC)   School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information Pelham Preparatory Academy 11X542 School Number (DBN): 321100011542 09-12 925 Astor Avenue; Bronx, NY 10469 718-944-3601 Phone Number: 718-944-3479 Fax: BenvenutoFerron bferron@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Geographical District: 11 Superintendent’s Office Address: Email Address: BenvenutoFerron Barbara Turk FLAVELLAR HARRIS BenvenutoFerron NINA ASIS EMILY RAMIREZ SERENITY HARRIS none District Information Carron Staple Superintendent: 1 Fordham Plaza CStaple@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718-741-5852 Phone Number: Fax: Field Support Center (FSC)   Bronx Field Support Center FSC: Executive Director’s Office Address: Jose Ruiz Executive Director: 1230 Zerega; Bronx NY 10462 JRuiz2@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 718-828-7776 Phone Number: 718-828-3113 Fax:   Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) BenvenutoFerron Barbara Turk FLAVELLAR HARRIS Theresa Garcia NINA ASIS EMILY RAMIREZ SERENITY HARRIS ANNE BRUCIA EVELIN MARTINEZ *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, Member/ Parent Member/Parent   Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) LETICIA MARTINEZ HAZEL JOHNSON KimberleeDavidson Frances Esposito Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Assistant Principal Member/ UFT Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/   Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with   the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement   Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? 1. Pelham Preparatory Academy’s Mission Statement:   Our student-centered learning community will empower students not only to become life-long learners, but also life-long leaders in their communities and the world. Mutual respect, understanding, value for community and a quest for knowledge will serve as guiding principles for our students whose common goals include four year graduation, college acceptance, and preparedness for careers beyond college. Seamless transitions will be fostered through our strong partnerships with The University of Vermont, College for Every Student, Lincoln Center 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. Pelham Preparatory Academy was established in 2002 under the auspices of the New Century High School Initiative by New Visions for Public Schools and The Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation in conjunction with the New York City Department of Education. In alignment with the school’s mission statement, Pelham Preparatory Academy was founded on the belief that all students will not only graduate high school with the necessary requirements to be admitted in to college, but also excel in order to surpass academic standards in the educational setting. Pelham Preparatory Academy continues to foster and develop this belief by supporting the many individual needs of the entire student body. As stated, Pelham Preparatory Academy enjoys strong partnerships with post-secondary institutions, notably the University of Vermont and Lehman College. The University of Vermont is unique as it includes a four-year comprehensive college-prep program, starting with freshmen and finishing with qualified seniors, who intend to matriculate at the University after high school. Students in this program enjoy enhanced financial aid and scholarship opportunities, as well as a support system unique to the partnership. Current students are exposed to the university through numerous workshops conducted at Pelham Preparatory Academy by the admission staff at the University of Vermont as well as some having the opportunity to visit the university free of charge. In addition to our collaboration with the University of Vermont, we enjoy a strong partnership with the College for Every Student (CFES) program. CFES provides unique support as our students explore their three key principles: Pathways to College, Mentoring, and Leadership through Service. These principles consistently show up throughout our school activities, community service projects, college advisement, and most importantly, in the classroom setting. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. Many of the Pelham Preparatory Academy students are children of immigrants or are immigrants themselves. Over 62% of our students receive free or reduced lunch as they come from economically disadvantaged environments. Most will be the first in their families to attend college. A large percentage live in single-parent, female headed households. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. 0  An area that we continue to grow and succeed is student progress toward graduation, specifically in credit accumulation and successful Regents completion and participation rates. We have implemented targeted Saturday and summer school offerings, which strictly adhere to the most recent academic policy. The challenge for an unscreened school is to keep each and every student on a four-year path toward a timely high school graduation. In addition, we understand that the lifeblood of a school is the students who are recruited. One accomplishment we are very proud of is, as of last year, we received the most high school applications in the Bronx for any public high school. We have an outstanding, full service high-school recruitment model that includes targeting appropriate middle schools for visits, open houses, prospective parent/student tours, and overall accessibility of information for 8 th -grade parents/guardians. Once a student comes to us, he/she is enrolled in the TRIO Summer-Bridge program before the commencement of his/her freshmen year; it is here that the true initiation to what Pelham Preparatory Academy is and what we want are incoming students to become begins. These expectations are consistently communicated and held throughout each grade level, as all learners can always look to students in the next cohort to see what success looks like. A key focus for us now is continuing to prepare students to meet college readiness benchmarks of earning an 80 on a math Regents exam, a 75 on the English Regents exam, and if applicable, receiving an advanced Regents diploma. We understand the importance of our students being college ready. The math program in particular has been overhauled, including hiring two new and talented instructors, as well as implementing multiple, unique support systems erected by our network, New Visions. We will continue to increase the number of Pelham Preparatory Academy students who leave our school with both college readiness criteria met and an advanced Regents diploma in order to ensure the mission of our school is always realized. Our School strengths reside in our school motto, “The High School with a College View”. We are a college preparatory institution. We specifically program our students around the model of college readiness in terms of offering students four years of math and four years of science courses. We have several Advanced Placement classes for qualified students, as well as a Marine Biology program, which is a certified DOE college-level course. Our students are strongly encouraged to participate in College Now programs, offered both on college campuses and off. We fully understand and embrace the metric for college readiness as every student is prepared to earn his/her high school diploma with that thought in mind. In accordance with our strong focus on academics, a major strength of ours is the caring community we have developed to service every student, regardless of his/her educational, social, and/or emotional needs. We offer full-service special education and ENL programs. Every student is given the attention and support he/she needs to be successful regardless of classification. Our graduation rates are among the highest in the city for limited unscreened schools. Because we wholeheartedly understand the needs of our children and consistently and continuously assess these with the needs of the school, we are successfully able to guide our learners toward their appropriate diploma type and post-secondary option. The past several years have seen consistent graduation rates hovering in the mid to low 90’s, and high 80’s. This is an accomplishment when weighted against the city average. Our post-secondary enrollment rates for the 6- and 18-month recent cohorts both rank in the 95-100 percentiles. We have built a culture of accountability, advancement, and success, not just in high school, but also after graduation as well. It’s the job of a school to prepare its’ learning community for future success and a strength of Pelham Preparatory Academy’s, as the numbers have shown, is that we are committed to not only doing our job, but also doing it well. 1  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 11X542 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 09,10,11,12 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 501 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 24 25 13 10 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 42 38 10 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 72.0% % Attendance Rate 68.3% % Reduced Lunch 4.0% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 1.6% 53.1% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 9.4% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 2.15 0% 11% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation 89% 79% 89.4% 16.8% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A NO N/A N/A YES Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A NO N/A N/A NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A YES N/A N/A YES No N/A 93 87 90.3% 3.8% 23.2% 28.1% 6.4% 3.0% 4 11% 7 N/A N/A 94% 90% 92.7% 14% N/A No No N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A NO NO N/A N/A N/A NO YES N/A N/A N/A YES 2  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Teachers work collaboratively in content teams during weekly meetings to align the curriculum to Common Core and Citywide Instructional Expectations. Through their work, curriculum and instruction is adapted to meet the individual needs of each of our students, particularly students within all subgroups. However, teachers need more time to work in teams and more time to work on adapting the curriculum and instruction as well as plan to implement academic intervention services. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. To strengthen students' literacy skills while promoting equity and access, the AP Literature and Composition curriculum will be utilized in a least two 11th grade ELA classes reflecting a 2% increase in ELA Regents scores for 2019. 3  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Content Team Time PD / Inquiry- Schedule meeting time into teacher/school schedule.   Professional development to train staff on use of protocols to be utilized in conducting inquiry.  Engage in cycles of assessment-monitoring-adaptation aimed at improving teacher practice while adapting curriculum and instruction to improve student performance. The focus of this work will be on creating and implementing rigorous instruction that will show growth through the synthesis and analysis of information gathered from various sources as described in our instructional focus.  Train staff on use of Google Apps for Education.  Create school staff Google site to share, store and maintain agendas, materials and other resources. Grade Team/Parent Engagement-  ●Meetings will be held on Tuesdays.  Train staff on protocols to be utilized in identifying students in need of AIS and creating innovative ideas to help students succeed.  Arrange for opportunities to engage/empower parents to be partners in improving student performance.  Train staff on use of Google Apps for Education  Create school staff Google site to share, store, and maintain agendas, materials and other resources Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All students Sept. - June Assistant Principal, PD Committee, and Pedagogical staff Sept. - June Assistant Principal, PD Committee, Guidance staff, and Pedagogical staff Students in danger of failing a course, off-track students, particularly ELLs and students with disabilities PPA Learning Community- All students Sept. - June Principal, PD Survey staff to identify topics of interest/need.  Meeting times will vary to allow access for all staff.   Arrange/organize workshops.  Create school staff Google site to share, store and maintain agendas, materials and other resources. Committee and Pedagogical staff 4  3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. PPA families with receive daily and weekly phone messages supporting them via our phone messaging system. In addition, students and families will have access to pupil path/skedula to keep inform parents on the academic status of their children. Access to the google platform will communicates multiple school wide events and activities at the school. Parents will receive mailings, and letters that will be back packed home. Targeted/Individual phone calls to families will be made daily by our Family para and Parent Coordinator. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Learning Partners Program- Chancellor’s initiative for schools to share, collaborate and inter-visit.   Teacher leaders and other pedagogical staff will facilitate workshops.  Office of Teacher Effectiveness Coach will support in further building staff capacity.  Google Apps for Education.  Chrome Books for staff to share and access info via Google Apps for Education.  Teacher/School schedule to allow for meeting time. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind X Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. January 2019: Grade, content, and AP teams will work with PCT's to have deliverables (evidence) of the work done. Evidence will include agendas, documents created, quantitative/qualitative data of improved student performance. As a result of the pedagogical work to strengthen instruction, evidence of student progress will be measured by an increase of 2% in ELA Regents pass rates from June 2018 to June 2019. By the end of May 2019, PPA Learning Community will have conducted at least two Mock exams and have evidence archived in Google Drive. 5  Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) Google Drive HSST Scholarship reports MOSL NYC ELA Assessment Data LEAD Higher Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 6  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? During past quality reviews, supervisory visits, and other similar visits by various individuals and/or organizations, students have stated that Pelham Prep is a family environment where each student feels connected to, at least, one adult. The student mentoring program has also shown that more than 90% of students that were paired with a mentor during their freshman year went on to graduate in four years. This was not the case for at risk students that were not paired with a mentor during the freshman year. While the CFES program is successful, it is limited in its scope as it is unable to include all the students in the school. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, through the implementation of restorative practices, PBIS and other youth development initiatives led by College for Every Student (CFES), TRIO program and PPA student government, there will be a 2% decrease in the number of principal suspensions. 7  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). A Youth Development team through student government will be created on every grade level. This team will be the voice of the students they represent and will assist in organizing activities and functions aimed at creating a more supportive and challenging environment for all students. Identify student mentors and train them on CFES mentoring strategies. Identify students in need of mentors and match them to mentors. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All students Sept. - June Assistant Principal, CFES Team 9 th , 10 th , 11 th , 12 th grade students At-risk students including all sub-groups Sept. – Dec. Assistant Principal, CFES Team Sept. – Dec. Assistant Principal, CFES Team Organize and carry out leadership/community building activities, such as “Ice Cream Social”, peer mentoring, peer-tutoring, fundraising events, community functions, etc. All students Sept. - June Principal, Assistant Principal and CFES Team 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. PPA families with receive daily and weekly phone messages supporting them via our phone messaging system. In addition, students and families will have access to pupil path/skedula to keep inform parents on the academic status of their children. Access to the google platform will communicates multiple school wide events and activities at the school. Parents will receive mailings, and letters that will be back packed home. Targeted/Individual phone calls to families will be made daily by our Family para and Parent Coordinator. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Organize time for TRIO, Student Government, and CFES team to meet. Program/schedule time for CFES leadership team (students) to meet. 8  CFES (College for Every Student) partnership. Organization provides ongoing leadership training to students and adults. TRIO provides community involvement, scholarship, internship and service opportunities to our students. PBIS roll out. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. CFES team will complete the mid-year analysis report, which is submitted to CFES Organization in February. Mentor students will be identified and paired with their respective mentees by December. There will have been, at least, three functions carried out by January. These include fundraisers, training for students and/or socio-academic functions. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. CFES Plan Student Government Google Platform Surveys TRIO log PBIS log Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 9  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Over the past three years, Pelham Prep began the work of creating a forum for teachers to undergo professional development while collaborating with each other to improve their teaching practice through teacher-led workshops, intervisitation, and work done within teacher teams. Teachers now have three venues to accomplish this work, weekly Content Team meetings, weekly Grade team/parent engagement meeting time and PPA Learning community. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 75% of teachers will have participated in at least 2 teacher-led peer inter-visitations. In addition, 20% of teachers will have hosted one intervisitation and actively engage in respective debriefing sessions with our PCT's in order to reflect on practice. 0  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Learning Partners Plus Model Teachers and Content Team leaders will be undergo training provided by Office of Teacher Effectiveness on conducting cycles of intervisitation. Model Teachers and Content Team Leaders will turn-key training to their respective teams. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All students Sept. – June Assistant Principal, PD Committee, Pedagogical staff All students Sept. - June Model Teachers, Content Team Leaders and pedagogical staff Content teams will engage in sharing and collaboration through lesson studies, intervisitations and teacher-led workshops. All students Sept. - June pedagogical staff, admin will support 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. PPA families with receive daily and weekly phone messages supporting them via our phone messaging system. In addition, stuPPAdents and families will have access to pupil path/skedula to keep inform parents on the academic status of their children. Access to the google platform will communicates multiple school wide events and activities at the school. Parents will receive mailings, and letters that will be back packed home. Targeted/Individual phone calls to families will be made daily by our Family para and Parent Coordinator. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Learning Partners/DCC Program- Chancellor’s initiative for schools to share, collaborate and inter-visit. Google Apps for Education, including Drive space and gmail accounts for all staff and all students. Chrome Books for staff to share and access info via Google Apps for Education. Teacher/School schedule to allow for meeting time. Coach provided by Office of Teacher Development 1  PCT's Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, 100% of teachers will be a part of a team (content and/or grade) and be a direct participant of the work. By February 2019, all Model teachers and Content Team Leaders will have undergone professional development on engaging in cycles of inter-visitation and lesson study protocol. By February 2019, the PCT's, Content Team Leaders, and teachers will have engaged in, at least, two intervisitations. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Deliverables, including agendas and student work samples stored on Google Drive resulting from the sharing and collaboration carried out by the pedagogical staff. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Administrative team currently uses Teachboost to document observations and share with teachers. However, the turnaround time to provide the Advance observation form is delayed as forms have to be synced from Teachboost to the Advance system. Only 55% of teachers were viewing their full observation reports directly on TeachBoost and waited to receive their final Advance report. Viewing directly from TeachBoost would have allowed staff to see their reports within three days. According to the 2017-2018 Quality Review, "Teaching strategies are aligned to the curricula and reflect the use of Danielson Framework for Teaching and the instructional shifts. Across most classrooms, there is consistent use of multiple entry points and challenging tasks for students in all grades". Administrative team needs to work to ensure that multiple entry points are instituted consistently across all classrooms. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, the school leadership will implement frequent observations of teacher practice and provide targeted feedback for the purpose of improving pedagogy to increase by 2% the average rating on Danielson's Framework 1E, to reflect growth in domains 3B, 3C, and 3D. 3  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Administrators will norm the observation process. This includes tagging to the Danielson framework, completing the observation form on TeachBoost (online observation system), syncing to Advance and sharing with teachers. Administrative team will undergo training on TeachBoost and Advance. Administrators, in collaboration with model teachers and PD committee will work to provide PD on conducting ongoing assessments in the classroom. Teacher TeachBoost accounts will be linked to their individual Gmail accounts on the school's Google domain, which will enable teachers to view their full observation report via email as soon as the report is completed by the administrator. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All students Sept. – June Administrators All students Sept. – June Administrators All students Sept. – June Administrators, Model Teachers, and PD Committee All Sept. Administrators & students Google Admin (teacher-leader) How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. PPA families with receive daily and weekly phone messages supporting them via our phone messaging system. In addition, stuPPAdents and families will have access to pupil path/skedula to keep inform parents on the academic status of their children. Access to the google platform will communicates multiple school wide events and activities at the school. Parents will receive mailings, and letters that will be back packed home. Targeted/Individual phone calls to families will be made daily by our Family para and Parent Coordinator. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Laptop for each administrator to record observations in TeachBoost. TeachBoost online observation system. Training for pedagogical staff on how to access and use TeachBoost, including all of its available resources. 4  Google Apps for Education for administrators to share observations and other related materials and resources with teachers. Time for administrators to be trained in the various systems, including TeachBoost, Advance and Google Apps for Education. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Progress will be monitored after each cycle of observations (December, January, February, March, April, May). Logs maintained in TeachBoost indicating when observations were delivered to teacher as well as when teachers logged into the system to access their respective observations as well as utilize the resources on the system. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. ADVANCE Data TeachBoost Data Observational Cycle Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 5  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Parent turnout to parent association meetings is low. School offers multiple workshops throughout year to inform parents about college and career readiness, new student orientation and other related topics. However, parents with students at different grade levels would like individualized sessions. PA meetings averaged only 6 families per meeting during the 2017-2018 school year. While the Quality Review indicated that school culture was an area of celebration and stated that parents felt "supported with focused goals and knowledge that their student is provided guidance supports to ensure that their educational experience is preparing them for the next level", parents did express their desires to have more activities tailored to specific grade levels, primarily on the 9th and 10th grade level to better prepare them to support their children in the higher grades. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By 2019, our Parent Coordinator and SLT will work closely with the Parent Association to increase parental participation by 10% from an average of 8 families per event or meeting to 10 families per event. 6  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Conduct grade level orientations/meet-n-greet for parents at start of school year. All students Sept. – June Administrators Offer info sessions/workshops to parents in conjunction with school’s partner organizations. Work with Parent Association President to increase parent turnout to PA meetings and other school functions. All students Sept. – June Administrators Guidance staff All students Sept. – June Administrators Guidance staff SLT PA association Student Council (student leadership program) 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. N/A Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Partnership with CFES (College for Every Student), UVM (University of Vermont), Lincoln Center Theatre, Gear UP, CUNY Arts, and Lehman College (TRIO). Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other 7  Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By the end of the year, Parent turnout at PA meetings will increase by 10% from an average of 8 families to 10 families per meeting. By February 2019, there will be an increase of 10% from 8 to 10 families per meeting. Info sessions/meet-n-greet done in Sept./Oct. There will be one individualized session per grade level. Two parent workshops will be offered by January 2019. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Data on parent involvement as documented from sign-in sheets at various events/activities held throughout the school-year. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 8  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Students in jeopardy of failing course. Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Tutoring Small group During school day Peer Tutoring One-on-one Before/after school Students not passing in class assessments. Mathematics Students in jeopardy of failing course. Tutoring Small group During school day Peer Tutoring One-on-one Before/after school Students not passing in class assessments. Science Students in jeopardy of failing course. Tutoring Small group During school day Peer Tutoring One-on-one Before/after school Students not passing in class assessments. Social Studies Students in jeopardy of failing course. Tutoring Small group During school day Peer Tutoring One-on-one Before/after school At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Students not passing in class assessments. Students in jeopardy of failing a course. Conference with parent and student Students referred by staff for socio-emotional issues. Conference with student Services requested by student and/or parent. Small group During school day One-on-one Before/after school Conference with parent 9  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) There are 12 students currently attending our school that are in Temporary Housing. 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. STH population will be provided the following services: Peer mentoring, peer tutoring, teacher tutoring after school, additional guidance and social work support, lunch and transportation services. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 0 After-school/lunch time activities, such as clubs, counseling. Participation in mentoring program and other socio-emotional support groups. Provide students with school supplies where needed. 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. N/A 1  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. To attract the best teachers, we attend hiring fairs organized by the DOE. We also recruit staff members through the Teaching Fellows, online postings and the DOE website, teacher education programs from local colleges and universities as well as through the Open Market system. We also actively maintain a database of teachers’ resumes and referrals with which to call new candidates. Teachers are interviewed initially by the school’s administrators, and then by our interviewing committee. Candidates are then invited to perform a series of demonstration lessons to ensure we are getting the highest-quality teachers available. All our teachers are highly qualified staff. We provide extensive professional development through in-house activities, training provided by our own administrators, teacher leaders, through outside organizations including our CFN, local colleges/universities, and private organizations. On-going professional development is critical to the success of our school as it is the tool to ensure that our staff is highly qualified. It is focused on the knowledge and skills related to the development and implementation of school programs and policies, educational pedagogy, and innovative instructional strategies to help students achieve higher standards. Such discourse takes place during common planning time (inquiry team) meetings, and monthly professional development days. Professional development is facilitated by internal staff members, our FSC, and other external organizations. The University of Vermont, our lead partner, provides a liaison which conducts workshops for staff and students relating to Early College Awareness. The University of Vermont and Jet Blue Airlines, our significant second partner, have provided staff development on the University campus. Professional development is also offered to teachers in more technological areas, such as SmartBoard training, basic/intermediate and advanced computer skills, and the use of other online resources including PupilPath (an online grading software. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development 2  Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). Professional development is individualized to meet the needs of all staff members including Administrators, Guidance Staff, Secretarial staff, Pedagogical staff and other support staff. PD is broken up into three components. Our professional Development & Inquiry program is composed of three parts as explained below. These three items will support our instructional focus for the 2018 academic school year, which is to enable students to "develop the ability to synthesize and analyze information gathered from various sources to strengthen both verbal and written argument(s), which will translate into stronger listening, speaking, reading and writing skills". Progress will be measured by comparing the MoSL ELA Performance Assessment Baseline to the End-of-Year Assessment as well as through cycles of inquiry performed by content teams and through our collaboration in the Learning Partners Program/DCC as a partner school.  Content Team Time PD/Inquiry- Weekly meeting for staff to meet by content and/or whole staff to engage in professional development and/or a cycle of assessment-monitoring-adaptation aimed at improving teacher practice while adapting curriculum and instruction to improve student performance. The focus of this work will be on creating and implementing rigorous instruction that will show growth through the synthesis and analysis of information gathered from various sources as described in the instructional focus.   Grade Team/Parent Engagement- Weekly meeting for staff to meet by grade team and/or whole staff to address the needs of students in danger of going off track and students who are off track by working together to implement Academic Intervention Supports while working hand-in-hand with parents. This intervention will focus on educating parents to support their children in realizing our instructional focus as well as provide students with additional services aimed at enabling students to achieve the skills/abilities identified in our instructional focus. PPA Learning Community- Ongoing series of workshops offered during varying times to ensure that all staff has access. Workshops will be facilitated, primarily, by teacher leaders and will be a venue for teachers to share, collaborate and inter-visit affirming the age-old adage “the answer is in the room”. Some of the topics to be covered will include All Things Google, Skedula/PupilPath, Differentiation, and Assessments. These series will be offered, at least, once per month beginning in October. The focus of this work will be on creating and implementing rigorous instruction that will better prepare all of our students for college and their future careers. These PD sessions will aim to provide our pedagogical staff with the strategies, and tools they need to support students in meeting the goals set forth in our instructional focus. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). 3  N/A Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). N/A 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. Professional Development committee will work closely with administrative team and PCT's to help guide the work the school does with regards to assessments and PD offered. Each teacher team will have a facilitator that will coordinate and document the progress of the team including the creation of agendas and archiving of deliverables, including materials and resources. The facilitator will be the voice of the team in selecting assessments, and PD topics to be offered. Teachers also reflect and give input throughout the observation process as to what areas they feel will improve their practice to, ultimately, improve student performance. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Column B Verify with an (X) Section Reference(s) 4  Title I Part A (Basic) Federal Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Federal Federal Federal 296,466.00 0 0 0 Tax Levy (FSF) Local 2,915,152.00 x x Section 5A, 5B, 5C, 5D, 5E, & 6 Section 5A, 5B, 5C, 5D, 5E, & 6 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and 5  achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 6  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school.Pelham Preparatory Academy , in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students Pelham Preparatory Academy will support parents and families of Title I students by: ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; 7  ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; The school’s Parent Involvement Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; 8  ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSAState accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the ESSA; ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. 9 School-Parent Compact (SPC)  School-Parent Compact (SPC) Pelham Preparatory Academy ,in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; Social-emotional learning ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; Access and Equity ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; 0  ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; 1  ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities 2  ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 3  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 11 School Name Pelham Preparatory Academy Borough Bronx School Number 542 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal BENVENUTO FERRON Coach type here ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Teacher/Subject Area Constance DiPiazza/Science Teacher/Subject Area type here Related-Service Provider Frances Esposito Superintendent Carron Staple Assistant Principal Kimberlee Davidson Coach type here School Counselor MICHELLE APPLEBAUM, Carolina Leroy Parent Sikander Ali Patwary Parent Coordinator type here Field Support Center Staff Member Richard Petrone Other (Name and Title) type here C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 0 3 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 1 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics 4  Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 525 Total number of ELLs 10 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 1.90% Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 0 1 2 3 4 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? The school uses data from ELA MOSL, NYSESLAT and NYSITELL results, Regents Tests results, and NYC Performance Test to assess literacy skills of the ELLs. This data provides the levels and proficiency of the ELLs in the four modalitities and in different content areas. This information will help all teachers to focus on the skills needed by ELL students to become more proficient in all modalities. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? ENL 5  3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? School leadership and teachers are constantly monitoring the progress of the ELL students by looking at student work (journals, essays) and individual teacher assessments to meet student needs. Parents, students and staff meet periodically to review the student's progress and adapt the instructional program to maximize student achievement. The school evaluates the ELL programs by examining the NYSESLAT results, MOSL ELA, and Regents exam results. 2015 NYSESLAT results show that 60% of ELLs reached Commanding level. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? ENL TEACHER WILL PROVIDE SUPPORT 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] N/A 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. NYSESLAT and NYSITELL data reveal that most students score higher in the listening and speaking modalities. Data patterns also reveals that more attention needs to be given towards improving reading and writing skills. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? ENL PUSH-IN Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. We offer a Freestanding ENL (Stand-Alone) program taught by a certified ESL teacher. The ELLs are scheduled for ENL instruction heterogeneously during one period each day. The students are then grouped homogeneously for additional period(s) based on their proficiency levels. The school does not have Integrated ENL. b. TBE program. If applicable. N/A c. DL program. If applicable. N/A 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? All ELLs receive the mandated minutes of ENL instruction for each proficiency level. Entering ELLs receive 540 minutes, Emerging ELLs receive 360 minutes and Transitioning ELLs receive 180 minutes of ENL. Expanding ELLs receive 180 minutes of ENL and ENL/Core Content Area. Commanding ELLs receive 90 minutes of ENL. The ages and grade levels of ELLs are taken into consideration by the ENL teacher, guidance, and administration when deciding placement and services along with the intructional/learning needs of each indivdual student. 6  3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. The ENL teacher collaborates with the content area teachers to plan lessons and share ENL strategies. They work together to find ways of scaffolding and reinforcing content to make it more comprehensible to ELLs. The teachers focus on explicit vocabulary building and developing domain specific language in order to meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? Home language support (translated text, bilingual dictionaries, buddy system) is provided in all subject areas to increase student comprehension. In addition, the ENL teacher provides one-on-one tutoring during the school day as well as after school, as needed. The Spanish LAB can also be used to support in instructional planning to ELLs whose home language is Spanish. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status To differentiate instruction, the ENL teacher and content area teachers review the NYSESLAT, ELA MOSL data, as well as student work to assess student progress. a. SIFE students are invited to attend one-on-one tutoring during the school day as well as after school. Home language support is provided to strengthen literacy in their home language. The ENL teacher works on explicit academic vocabulary building. Guidance counselors work with SIFE students to support their social-emotional progress. SIFE students also develop higher order thinking skills through sorting, analyzing, synthesizing reading passages appropriate to their comprehension level. The students' progress is evaluated regularly to determine appropriate interventions. b. Newcomers receive one-on-one tutoring with the ENL teacher during and/or after school day. Content area teachers also provide small group instruction to support newcomers in vocabulary building, reading comprehension, study skills, organization skills, notetaking strategies, building listening and speaking skills, in addition to social skills. c. While ELLs receiving 4-6 years of service are typically fluent in their social language, they need additional support in developing their cognitive academic language proficiency. To motivate this group of ELLs , we utilize the Smartboard, audio/visual materials, presentations, field trips, and small group work. Content-area teachers are encouraged to pair ELLs with high achieving English-speaking students. Glossaries are also available to ELLs. There are also targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, Math, and other content areas. Students are offered additional tutoring before, and/or after school. Assistance is provided in the student's native language where necessary. d. Long-term ELLs receive personalized attention from all teachers to address their particular learning styles. Teachers focus on vocabulary building, test preparation, note-taking skills, study skills, and synthesizing ideas to support the long-term ELLs. Counselors provided career guidance. e. After an ELL has tested out of ENL via the NYSESLAT and ELA Regents where applicable, the ENL teacher remains an ongoing communication with each student to monitor the student's progress and ensure that mandated services needed are being provided. Furthermore, students are still offered additional tutoring. Students are still provided with glossaries and their testing modifications in all classes for two years. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? 7  ELL-SWDs are served as per their IEP. In all content area classes including SETSS, content is being reinforced across the curriculum throughout the day as teachers strategically co-plan and provide all mandated testing accommodations in order to accelerate English language development. The IEP coordinator and the guidance counselors ensure that ELL-SWDs receive appropriate ENL instruction and appropriate flexible program as detailed on their IEP. During the student's IEP meetings, the student's progress is discussed and collaboration is ensured by all team members (i.e. Special Educator, ELL Teacher, Psychologist, General Education Teacher). In addition, team members provide input about the student's individual needs and some of these services may include speech, occupational therapy, and physical therapy. To support a student whom may require mandated bilingual instruction, the student's paraeducator supports his/her instruction by translating and additionally modifying the content based on his/her IEP. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? In order to enable diverse ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment, former special class 15:1 ELLs are placed in an ICT setting with a push-in ENL pedagogue. Also, students with IEPs receiving SETSS are programmed for ENL with madated push-in related-services speech-therapist once a week according to their IEP. We utilize all resources that are offered in order to allow in the most flexibility in scheduling and setting. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. The targeted ELL subgroups are all ELL students whose NYSESLAT test scores did not show or showed little improvement in the reading and writing modalities. There are also students who take Regents Exams repeatedly and have trouble attaining passing scores. ENL and content area teachers work collaboratively to ensure progress. ELLs in ELA, math, and other content areas are given extra help through tutoring by peers or by teachers. Tutoring using the student's home language is also provided if needed. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? Instructions will continue to be more aligned with the Common Core Learning Standards with the focus on supporting ELLs as they develop domain specific language in their content area classes. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? N/A 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. ELLs are invited/encouraged to join in afterschool activities (school band, sports teams), tutoring programs in all subjects conducted by teachers, TRIO (The Lehman College Educational Talent Search Pathways to College Program), field trips to performances, visits to colleges and Opening Act (campus-wide after-school theater program). 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. The ENL teacher has access to rooms with Smartboards, online programs including Datacation/Skedula, StudyIsland and Quia web. These allow the teacher to provide students with audio/video pieces, as well as to implement interactive experiences through games, and other activities via the internet. Library and reference materials are also provided in the classroom. Books and other textbooks used in class are determined based on the particular needs of the ELL population. Bilingual dictionaries and glossaries are also utilized. Content books and content glossaries written in the student's native language (if available) are also provided. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? 8  In the ENL class and in all content-area classes, students are provided maximum home language support. Materials include: bilingual dictionaries, translated texts, glossaries, and exams in their home language if applicable. Students are instructed on dictionary skills and are encouraged to utilize them. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. Required services correspond to ELLs' ages and grade levels because grade and age appropriate materials are provided and used. Students are exposed to resources that will prepare them for college and career readiness and life after high school. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? The ENL teacher has access to rooms with Smartboards, online programs including Datacation/Skedula, StudyIsland and Quia web. These allow the teacher to provide students with audio/video pieces, as well as to implement interactive experiences through games, and other activities via the internet. Library and reference materials are also provided in the classroom. Books and other textbooks used in class are determined based on the particular needs of the ELL population. Bilingual dictionaries and glossaries are also utilized. Content books and content glossaries written in the student's native language (if available) are also provided. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). Prior to entry to the school, incoming 9th grade ELLs are offered a seat in the Bridge Program. This program helps incoming freshmen to have a smooth transition from middle school to high school. If possible, students entering the upper level grades (10-12) are offered seats in summer school, if necessary, prior to their start at the school. Newly enrolled ELLs who come into the school throughout the school year are offered support through mentoring system. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? Spanish language classes are offered to ELLs. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? N/A Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? All teachers of ELLs and all ELL personnel are encouraged to attend professional development sessions in order to support ELL students. School personnel atttend workshops sponsored by the DOE in order to remain current about intiatives pertaining to ELL Policy. The ENL teacher regularly attends profesional development offered by DELLS and the Borough Field Support Center in order to support the langauge develoment of ELLs with a focus on ENL progression. Professional developments given by the Bronx Borough Field Support Center and DELLS are offered to teachers of ELLs. Teachers attend LPP (Learning Partners Program) to promote collaboration among teachers. 9  2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. The ninth-and tenth-grade guidance counselor regularly attends professional development about how to plan workshops in order to assist freshmen with the transition from middle to high school. This information is shared with staff memebers who work closely with those students transitioning in to high school. The ENL coordinator meets with the freshmen teachers in order to discuss the performace levels of all incoming ELL students. Assistant Principals, teachers and other staff members working with ELLs receive an individualized professional development program tailored to their specific needs in providing services and assistance to ELLs. Professional development is provided by the Senior ELL Compliance Specialist, Interschool Teacher Development Coach, DELLS, the Borough Field Support Center as well as the Learning Partners School Support Program . Teacher teams common planning time is also held twice a week for all staff to discuss strategies/plans to help students meet the Common Core Learning Standards. The ENL teacher regularly meets with general content teachers, guidance and school leaders to discuss ways of addressing the needs and progress of ELLs. All teachers are offered opportunities to attend workshops offered by the Interschool Teacher Development Coach, DELLS and the Learning Partners Program. Support staff from the Borough Field Support Center periodically come to the school to give ELL training. Attendance and agendas are kept to record professional development activities. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? Parents of ELLs are called to come to school to discuss language development progress/needs and proficiency levels of the students in all content areas; interpreters are provided when needed. The school calls the Translation and Interpretation Unit if parents require an interpreter for any language that is not spoken by the school staff. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Parents of ELL students are invited to an annual potluck/meeting initiated by the ENL teacher. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. 0 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Benvenuto Ferron, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 1  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: Pelham Preparatory Academy School DBN: 542 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Title Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) BENVENUTO FERRON Principal Kimberlee Davidson Assistant Principal Parent Coordinator Virna Feliciano ENL/Bilingual Teacher Sikander Ali Patway Parent Constance DiPiazza Teacher/Subject Area MICHELLE APPLEBAUM, Carolina Leroy Carron Staple Richard Petrone Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach School Counselor Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Francis Esposito Other Other Other 9/06/17 9/06/17 9/06/17 9/06/17 9/06/17 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 9/06/17 9/06/17 9/06/17 9/06/17 1/1/01 1/1/01 2  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 11x542 School Name: Pelham Preparatory Academy Superintendent: Carron Staple The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No (*Primary) * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. The school determines the primary language spoken by the parents/guardians of each student enrolled in the school. Furthermore, during the intake process, all parents of newcomers to the NYCDOE are given a Home Language Identification Survey to complete. This form helps us to identify which language is predominately spoken at home by parents/guardians, in what language they prefer to receive written information from the school and in what language they prefer to communicate orally with school staff. Parents/guardians are interviewed by trained/qualified staff at this time in order to determine their primary home language. Parents/guardians also complete a student emergency card where they indicate their preferred written and oral language. The family assistant periodically surveys and tracks parents/guardians language needs and updates pertinent information on ATS and runs a Home Language Report. The Language Identification Tool is posted to aid parents/guardians or any visitor who comes to the school so they can indicate which language they speak and whether they require any interpretation services. 3  2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Language English, Spanish, Arabic, Korean, 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. All calenders, parent-techer conference announcements, after school programs infromation, New york state testing dates, general overwiew of student curriculum, and letters form school. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide interpretation service(s)? Meeting Name The school's bilingual administrator, social worker, guidance counselor, licensed Spanish teachers, bilingual staff members and parent members of the School Leadership Team and Parent Association provide oral interpretation services in order to meet the needs of parents/guardians. The Department's Translation and Interpretation Unit is utilized to 4  provide oral translation services for parents/guardians in their native language. The internet is also utilized and inquiries can be addressed to translations@schools.nyc.gov and http://www.nyc.gov/schools/offices/translation. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? The school will provide translation and interpretation services to all parent/guardians who require language assistance in order to communicate effectively gather information. The school maintains an appropriate and current record of the primary language of each parent. This information is maintained in ATS, on the student emergency card and Parent/Guardian Home Language Identification Survey if applicable. The school will utilize (and post where applicable) the documents/required notifications translated by The Translation and Interpretation Unit and provide parents/guardians with such documents/required notifications. When necessary, the school will utilize The Department's Translation and Interpretation Unit to provide interpretation services. 5 
