2018-19 SCHOOL COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (SCEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 08X562 School Name: BLUEPRINT MIDDLE SCHOOL Principal: TYNEKA HARRINGTON 2018-19 SCEP-FL 1  School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) Section 4: SCEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 SCEP-FL 2  School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information BlueprintMiddle School 320800010562 6-8 School Number (DBN): 08X562 1111 Pugsley Avenue, Rm 219, Bronx, NY 10472 718-822-2780 718-822-2279 Phone Number: Gerard Valentin Fax: GValentin@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Geographical District: 8 Email Address: Tyneka Harrington Aliza Fuentes KarinaAli Gerard Valentin JosetteThompson NA NA District Information Erika Tobia Superintendent: 1230 Zerega Avenue, Bronx, NY 10462 Superintendent’s Office Address: Superintendent’s Email Address: Phone Number: 7188286653 7188282760 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) 2018-19 SCEP-FL 3  Bronx FSC: Executive Director’s Office Address: Jose Ruiz Executive Director: 1 FordhamPlaza jruiz2@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 7188287776 Phone Number: 718828-6280 Fax: 2018-19 SCEP-FL 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the SCEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Tyneka Harrington AlizaFuentes KarinaAli JosetteThompson NA NA NA *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Monica Orellana ClaribelNunez Parent Parent 2018-19 SCEP-FL 5  Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) MagalyMorales CraigJiles Jose Rivera Gerard Valentin NA NA NA NA NA NA Parent Staff Staff Staff Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ 2018-19 SCEP-FL 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the School Comprehensive Educational Plan The School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) is a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. The process of developing and implementing the SCEP is aligned to the Framework for Great Schools. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding SCEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department has established programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students supports to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and SCEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint for continuous improvement that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to increase student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 7  In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five (5) goals and action plans that align with the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. Accountability Tools and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is informed by the New York State Education Department’s (NYSED) Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) Tenets, the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Rubric, School Quality Guide and other quantitative and qualitative data tools. NYSED’s Six DTSDE Tenets To strengthen the existing system, the NYSED has developed a tool that captures the best practices from each of the current tools called the Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness. This new tool encompasses multiple instruments such as interviews, classroom observations and surveys. The protocol will begin with a clear and cogent statement of the optimal conditions of an effective school and the instruments comprising the protocol will measure how close or far away a particular school is to the optimal conditions identified. Once reviewed, the school and district will create a strategic plan to address the areas in need of improvement. All current Priority and Focus Schools and Focus Districts must use the tool; districts that are required to submit District Comprehensive Improvement Plans and Comprehensive Educational Plans also will use the tool. The DTSDE protocol includes a rubric, which identifies clear and coherent expectations of the optimal conditions of an effective school and school district across the following six tenets:  Tenet 1: District Leadership and Capacity  Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions  Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support  Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions  Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health, and  Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement 2018-19 SCEP-FL 8  NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The 2017-18 Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) I. II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Structures for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the SCEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the SCEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. Next Steps for SCEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 9   Step 3: In Part 1A of the Section 5: Needs Assessment indicate the Statement of Practice (SOP) from the DTSDE Tenets that will be addressed in the action plan. Schools that received an Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) School Review should use the recommendations from the review to select their SOPs. Schools that did not undergo an IIT review should select SOPs informed by the major findings/recommendations from your most recent Quality Review (QR) or Central-led Review (CLR), and other qualitative and quantitative data.  Step 4: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 5: Build consensus around activities, strategies and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 6: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 7: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 10  Section 4: SCEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Blueprint is a college preparatory middle school that puts students on the road to college completion through participation in a collaborative and nurturing environment that is focused on individual student need. Our learning environment meets students where they are, and we design academic Blueprints that serve as a roadmap for students, parents and teachers on students’ mission to meet our graduation competencies. Our instructional program is backwards planned from college admissions and completion indicators and is specifically designed to utilize a problem solving and inquiry-based approach that demands higher order and critical thinking. We use student interest and relevance data to determine course content and study students weekly to determine the appropriate academic, social, emotional and familial supports necessary for their success. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. Blueprint Middle School is a college preparatory middle school, serving students in grades 6-8 in the Parkchester area of the Bronx in District 8. We are a newly consolidated school, comprised of Blueprint MS and JHS 125 staff and students. Blueprint partners with Teacher’s College Reading & Writing Project to support our literacy work throughout the school. We partner with the Urban Advantage Science Program to support our science program and Metamorphosis Teaching and Learning Communities to support our mathematics program. To support our social studies program, we partner with the NY Historical Society. We partner with the Yale Center for Emotional intelligence to support our students' social and emotional development and utilize a Restorative Practices approach to discipline. Our after school partner is ASPIRA. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. Our student body consists of 20.86% ENLs, 20.12% Special Education students, 55.47% Hispanic students, 22.93% Asian students and 12.13% Black students. 15.9% of our student body reside in temporary housing and 88.4% qualify for free or reduced lunch. 39% of students scored Level 3 or 4 on the 2017 NYS ELA Exam and 28% scored level 3 or 4 on the 2017 NYS Math Exam. A large percentage of our students come to our school assessed below grade level and lacking critical foundational skills, as identified on baseline assessments in ELA and math. Special needs of our population include remediation of foundational skills to mastery, additional social and emotional supports and counseling, ENL emerging language instruction, differentiated supports for special needs and all students. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. Over the past year, our school has made the most progress in two areas of the Framework for Great Schools: Supportive Environment & Collaborative Teachers. We have created a supportive and nurturing leaning environment that is focused on the individual needs of students. This is supported by collaborative teacher teams, that meet weekly to examine data, plan and revise curriculum and discuss supports for student need. This year, we plan to strengthen and maintain these areas while focusing on Rigorous Instruction. As indicated in our 2016-2017 School Quality Review, an area of strength for our school is in the use of Common Core aligned curriculum in all content areas. Our focus will continue to be on teacher development, specifically on the design, analysis and use of assessment data, alignment with clear learning objectives, and the design and delivery of intellectually engaging instruction for students. As such, our professional development focus for the year will be around Danielson 1E: Designing Coherent Instruction; 3D: Using Assessment in Instruction; and 3C: Engaging Students in Learning and the use of instructional strategies to support the intellectual engagement of students. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 11  2018-19 SCEP-FL 12  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 08X562 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 06,07,08 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 336 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 10 16 10 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 29 31 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 84.0% % Attendance Rate 81.5% % Reduced Lunch 12.5% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 1.2% 60.7% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 5.1% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 6.25 21% 63% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 38.6% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) No N/A 33 45 92.1% 2.1% 22.9% 14.3% 18.8% 1.2% 2 33% 4.8 27.8% 0% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No Yes Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No No Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups SWD, Black, Hispanic, ED Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities N/A YES N/A NO YES Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A NO N/A NO NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A YES N/A N/A YES High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient N/A N/A N/A N/A YES YES N/A NO YSH NO NO N/A NO NO N/A N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 SCEP-FL 13  Economically Disadvantaged N/A ALL STUDENTS N/A 2018-19 SCEP-FL 14  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 3 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 3.2 The school leader ensures and supports the quality implementation of a systematic plan of rigorous and coherent curricula appropriately aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS) that is monitored and adapted to meet the needs of students. Teachers develop and ensure that unit and lesson plans used include data-driven instruction (DDI) protocols that are appropriately aligned to the CCLS and NYS content standards and address student achievement needs. The school leader and teachers have developed a comprehensive plan for teachers to partner within and across all grades and subjects to create interdisciplinary curricula targeting the arts, technology, and other enrichment opportunities. Teachers implement a comprehensive system for using formative and summative assessments for strategic short and long-range curriculum planning that involves student reflection, tracking of, and ownership of learning. 3.3 3.4 3.5 SOP(s) Addressed X X NA x Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 1. Strengths ● Common Core aligned curriculum in all content areas, 2016-2017 (Blueprint MS QR) ● Use of Teacher’s College Reading & Writing Project units of study and professional development to support literacy instruction in the humanities and science classrooms ● Use of Connected Mathematics in the mathematics classrooms ● Use Of Project Based Instruction in Science Common Core and Next Generation Science Standards aligned science curriculum ● Regents level coursework in science and mathematics ● Students baseline assessed for grade level and prerequisite skills 2018-19 SCEP-FL 15  ● Well Developed Supportive Environment, evidence by 2016-2017 Well Developed QR rating in Indicator 3.4 (Blueprint MS) ● Well Developed Environment of Trust, evidenced by 2016-2017 Well Developed QR rating in Indicator 1.4 (Blueprint MS) 2. Focus Need ● QR Indicator 1.2: Develop teacher pedagogy from a coherent set of beliefs about how students learn best that is informed by the instructional shifts and Danielson Framework for Teaching, aligned to the curricula, engaging, and meets the needs of all learners so that all students produce meaningful work product ● Based on 2016-2017 Advance data, consistent teacher use of assessment date in instruction (Danielson 3D: Using Assessment) ● Based on 2016-2017 Advance data, consistent teacher use of instructional strategies to support the intellectual engagement of students (Danielson 3C: Engaging Students in Learning) Based on 2016-2017 Advance data, consistent teacher team design of coherent instruction as evidenced through learning objectives (Danielson 1E: Designing Coherent Instruction) Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 100% of teachers will increase the daily use of assessment in instruction, as evidence by an increase of 10% (>54%) more teachers being rated effective or highly effective as compared to the 2017-2018 Danielson observation data (44%) for Domain 3D (Blueprint). 2018-19 SCEP-FL 16  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Teachers will participate in professional development cycles on Danielson Domain 3D Teachers September 2018-June 2019 Collaboratively expand and refine the guidebook of focus strategies for intellectual engagement, assessment and coherent instructional planning Teachers July 2018-June 2019 Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Principal, AP, Model Teachers, Team Leaders, PD Partnership Organizations (see narrative) Principal,AP, Team Leaders, & Team Leaders Implement for newer teachers and reinforce for returning teachers instructional focus strategies for intellectual engagement, assessment and coherent instructional strategies to ensure alignment of practices across the school Teachers September 2018 - June 2019 Teacher, Team Leaders, AP, Principal Assess teacher 2018-2019 use of strategies for assessment and coherent instructional planning and compare to 2017-2018 Advance Data for teachers from both schools under the consolidation Teachers AP, Principal December, 2018; March, 2019; and June, 2019 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. We will continue to engage all families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and the Common Core through a series of monthly workshops throughout the school year to address these items:  September 2018, Family Night, Introduction of curriculum and requirements through course outlines, Principal, Teachers, Counselors. Overview of the instructional supports and academic enrichment available to all students, subgroups and grades  October 2018, Middle School Common Core Humanities presentation, Parent Coordinator, Humanities Team  November 2018, Middle School Common Core & Regents Math presentation, Parent Coordinator, Math Team  December 2018, Middle School Common Core & Regents Science presentation, Parent Coordinator, Science Team 2018-19 SCEP-FL 17   January 2019, Middle School Common Core & Regents Social Studies presentation, Parent Coordinator, Humanities Team February 2019, Preparing for the NYS ELA Exam presentation, Parent Coordinator, Humanities Team   March 2019, Preparing for the NYS Math Exam presentation, Parent Coordinator, Math Team  April 2019, Preparing for the Algebra, Science & American History Regents Exams presentations, Math, Science & Humanities Teams  May 2019, Preparing for End of Year Portfolio Presentations, Parent Coordinator, AP  June 2019, Previewing the Requirements of Next Year, Parent Coordinator, Teacher Teams Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. ● 2 Model Teachers, 5 Full-time ESL Teachers ● Partnership with Teachers College Reading & Writing Project ● Partnership with Metamorphosis Teaching Learning Communities ● Partnership with the Yale Center for Emotional Intelligence ● Partnership with ASPIRA After-school program  Data Partnership with District Public for data analysis and PD  Data Partnership with Ed for data predictions, analysis and PD  Per Session for Team Planning to facilitate analysis of student work  Per Session for Data Specialist hour  Procurement of Data Warehouse Program Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) X X Title I SWP Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal.  By December 30, 2018, there will be an overall 3% increase in teacher ratings on Danielson 3C, 3D and 1E from 2017-2018 combined baseline data from both schools  By March 31, 2019, there will be an overall 6% increase in teacher ratings on Danielson 3C, 3D and 1E from 2016-2017 combined baseline data from both schools  By June 30, 2019, there will be an overall 10% increase in teacher ratings in Danielson 3C, 3D and 1E from 2016-2017 combined baseline data from both schools Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 18   ADVANCE observational data based on the Danielson rubric Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 19  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 5 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 5.2 The school leader establishes overarching systems and understandings of how to support and sustain student social and emotional developmental health and academic success. 5.3 The school articulates and systematically promotes a vision for social and emotional developmental health that is aligned to a curriculum or program that provides learning experiences and a safe and healthy school environment for families, teachers, and students. 5.4 All school stakeholders work together to develop a common understanding of the importance of their contributions in creating a school community that is safe, conducive to learning, and fostering of a sense of ownership for providing social and emotional developmental health supports tied to the school’s vision. 5.5 The school leader and student support staff work together with teachers to establish structures to support the use of data to respond to student social and emotional developmental health needs. SOP(s) Addressed NA X NA NA Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? Strengths ● 92% Attendance Rate 2017-2018 school year ● Attendance Rate higher that the District and City-wide Average ● School-wide use of Restorative Practices ● Low suspension rate ● Well Developed Quality Review Indicator 3.4 : A culture of learning that communicates and supports high expectations on 2016-2017 QR 2018-19 SCEP-FL 20  ● Well Developed Quality Review Indicator 1.4: Structures for a positive learning environment, inclusive culture, and student success on 2016-2017 QR ● Maintenance in Supportive Environment ratings in consolidated school environment based on the 2017-2018 School Environment Survey Priority Needs ● Increased awareness of Restorative Practices among parents and students ● Increased awareness of Emotional intelligence among staff, students and teachers ● Increased use of Emotional Intelligence and Restorative strategies with students Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools –Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, there will be a 5% decrease in student incidents based on OORS data, as result of implementation of Emotional Intelligence and Restorative Practices among faculty, students and families. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 21  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Survey of awareness of Emotional Intelligence and Restorative Practices philosophies and strategies Dedicated Professional Development sessions for Staff on Emotional Intelligence Inclusion of Emotional Intelligence and Restorative Practices updates in Monthly Parent Newsletter The Principal, AP, Culture Team and Teachers will receive Professional Development on the implementation of Emotional Intelligence and Restorative Practices 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Students, Parents, School Staff Blueprint Middle School Consolidated Faculty & Staff Parents Culture Team, Technology Specialist September, 2018; December, 2018; March, 2019; June, 2019 September 2018-June 2019 Guidance Counselors and School Culture Team Monthly September, 2018 - June, 2019 Newsletter Coordinator, Parent Coordinator, Culture Team School Culture Team, Principal, AP September, 2018 - June, 2019 Yale Center for Emotional Intelligence, Institute for Restorative Practices How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. We will engage families and support their understanding of a Supportive Environment through the following activities:  Conduct baseline survey of families aligned with the Supportive Environment indicators in the School Environment Survey, Emotional Intelligence and Restorative Practices, October 2018, Culture Team  Conduct mid-point surveys of families aligned with the Supportive Environment indicators in the School Environment Survey, emotional Intelligence & Restorative Practices, December 2018, March 2019, Culture Team 2018-19 SCEP-FL 22    Include Emotional Intelligence and Restorative Practices section in the school newsletter, Monthly September 2018-June 2019, Culture Team Inform parents of restorative response to incidents involving their students within the school, September 2018-June 2019, Culture Team Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. ● Deans, Guidance Counselors, Social Worker ● Partnership with the Yale Center for Emotional Intelligence ● Partnership with The Institute for Restorative Practices ● Per Session After School Meetings for Culture Team ● Per Session After School Grade Team Meetings ● Per Session for Conducting Fairness Committee  ● Professional Development in Restorative Practices at IIRP Conferences  ● Professional Development in Emotional Intelligence at the Yale Center for Emotional Intelligence Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal.  December, 2018; March, 2019; and June, 2019 Student, Parent, Staff Supportive Environment Survey Results Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress.  NYC School Survey Supportive Environment Section Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 23  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 4 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 4.2 School and teacher leaders ensure that instructional practices and strategies are organized around annual, unit, and daily lesson plans that address all student goals and needs. 4.3 Teachers provide coherent, and appropriately aligned Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS)-based instruction that leads to multiple points of access for all students. 4.4 Teachers and students work together to implement a program/plan to create a learning environment that is responsive to students’ varied experiences and tailored to the strengths and needs of all students. SOP(s) Addressed X X X 4.5 Teachers inform planning and foster student participation in their own learning process by using a variety of summative and formative data sources (e.g., screening, interim measures, and progress monitoring). Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. X 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 1. Strengths ● Teachers meet weekly in Grade Teams ● Teachers meet weekly during the school day in Content Area Teams ● Teacher meet weekly after school in Content Area Teams ● Teachers plan curriculum maps, unit plans, pacing calendars, lesson plans collaboratively 2. Priority Needs ● Develop teacher pedagogy from a coherent set of beliefs about how students learn best that is informed by the instructional shifts and Danielson Framework for Teaching, aligned to the curricula, engaging, and meets the needs of all learners so that all students produce meaningful work produce meaningful work product. Ensure that all teachers understand and incorporate these beliefs and practices. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 24  ● Increased use of formative assessments and data-based decision-making in all classrooms ● Increased planning of instructional strategies for student engagement in all classrooms ● Increase alignment of learning objectives, assessments and learning activities Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 100% of Content Area teacher teams will meet weekly to plan, model and practice Blueprint's strategies for intellectual engagement, assessment and coherent instructional planning resulting in a 5% increase in effective and highly effective ratings in Danielson 3C and 3D as measured by MOTP scores in ADVANCE. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 25  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Teachers will participate in cycles of professional development in Danielson 1E, 3D and 3C Teachers Teachers will participate in weekly team meetings to write lesson plans that incorporate focused strategies based on Danielson 1E, 3D and 3C Teachers Teachers will watch, assess, discuss and improve videos of lessons in which strategies for engagement, assessment and instructional coherence are featured Teachers Octoberr 2017-June 2018 Principal, AP, Team Leaders, Model Teachers September, 2018 -June, 2019 Model Teachers, Team Leaders, Partner Coaches, Principal October, 2018 - June, 2019 Model Teachers, Team Leaders, Principal 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. We will engage families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and Strategies through a series of monthly workshops throughout the school year to address these items:  September 2018, Family Night, Introduction of curriculum and requirements through course outlines, Principal, Teachers, Counselors  October 2018, Middle School Common Core Humanities presentations, Parent Coordinator, Humanities Team  November 2018, Middle School Common Core & Regents Math presentations, Parent Coordinator, Math Team  December 2018, Middle School Common Core & Regents Science presentations, Parent Coordinator, Science  Team January 2018, Middle School Common Core & Regents Social Studies presentations, Parent Coordinator, Humanities Team February 2018, Preparing for the NYS ELA Exam, Parent Coordinator, Humanities Team   March 2018, Preparing for the NYS Math Exam, Parent Coordinator, Math Team  April 2018, Preparing for the Algebra, Science & American History Regents Exams, Math, Science & Humanities Teams  May 2018, Preparing for End of Year Portfolio Presentations, Parent Coordinator, AP  June 2018, Previewing the Requirements of Next Year, Parent Coordinator, Teacher Teams 2018-19 SCEP-FL 26  Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Model Teachers (2) ESL Teachers (5) Per Session for After School Content Area Meetings Team Member Participation in ASCD Conference for Professional Development in Support of Danielson 1E, 3C, 3D Team Member Participation in NCTM Conference for Professional Development in Support of Danielson 1E, 3C and 3D Staff Retreat for Team Collaborative Planning Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) Title I SWP Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Mid-Point Benchmarks will take place at the end of each trimester in December 2018, March 2019 and June 2019 based on the review of Advance data on Danielson 1E, 3C and 3D, as well as collaborative teacher team rubric assessments Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress.  Teacher observations report data  Collaborative Teacher Team Rubric Assessments Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 27  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 2 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 2.2 The school leader ensures that the school community shares the Specific, Measurable, Ambitious, Results-oriented, and Timely (SMART) goals/mission and long-term vision inclusive of core values that address the priorities outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP). Leaders make strategic decisions to organize programmatic, human, and fiscal capital resources. 2.3 2.4 The school leader has a fully functional system in place aligned to the district's Annual Professional Performance Review (APPR) to conduct targeted and frequent observation and track progress of teacher practices based on student data and feedback. 2.5 Leaders effectively use evidence-based systems and structures to examine and improve critical individual and school-wide practices as defined in the SCEP (student achievement, curriculum and teacher practices; leadership development; community/family engagement; and student social and emotional developmental health). SOP(s) Addressed X NA X X Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 1. Strengths The information below references the principal of record under the newly consolidated school structure: ● Principal is an experienced instructional leader who attends monthly professional development to improve her skills ● Principal has created partnerships with organizations to support and improve student learning and performance ● 95% of teachers stated that the principal understands how children learn best, based on the 2016-2017 School Survey ● 95% of teachers agreed or strongly agreed that the principal/school leader at their school sets high standards for student learning, based on the 2016-2017 School Survey  100% of teachers stated on the 2016-2017 School Survey that the principal/school leader takes a personal interest in the professional development of teachers 2018-19 SCEP-FL 28   At this school 100% of teachers stated on the 2016-2017 School Survey that curriculum, instruction, and learning materials are well coordinated across the different grade levels (Effective School Leadership) Needs ● The principal shares the SMART goals addressed in the S/CEP across the school community  The principal effectively uses evidence-based systems and structures to examine and improve critical individual and school-wide practices as defined in the S/CEP Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART– Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, as result of effective leadership through the critical use of action plans to examine and improve individual and school-wide practices as defined in the SCEP, there will be a 10% increase in student performance on the NYS ELA Exam. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 29  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Plan Professional Development Calendar to include Principal-led session on 2017-2018 school-wide goals Create and utilize a school-wide action plan based on 2017-2018 SCEP goals Assess progress towards and revise SCEP goals Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Teachers Teachers, Parents & Students Teachers, Parent & Students September 2017 September 2017-June 2018 September 2017 - June 2018 Principal Principal, Team Leaders, Parent Coordinator Principal, AP, Team Leaders, PD Partners, Parent Coordinator 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight.  September 2017, Family Night, Introduction of curriculum and requirements through course outlines, Principal, Teachers, Counselors  October 2017, Middle School Common Core Humanities, Parent Coordinator, Humanities Team  November 2017, Middle School Common Core & Regents Math, Parent Coordinator, Math Team  December 2017, Middle School Common Core & Regents Science, Parent Coordinator, Science Team    March 2018, Preparing for the NYS Math Exam, Parent Coordinator, Math Team  April 2018, Preparing for the Algebra, Science & American History Regents Exams, Math, Science & January 2017, Middle School Common Core & Regents Social Studies, Parent Coordinator, Humanities Team February 2018, Preparing for the NYS ELA Exam, Parent Coordinator, Humanities Team Humanities Teams  May 2018, Preparing for End of Year Portfolio Presentations, Parent Coordinator, AP  June 2018, Previewing the Requirements of Next Year, Parent Coordinator, Teacher Teams Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. ● 2 Assistant Principals 2018-19 SCEP-FL 30  ● TCRWP Partnership ● Metamorphosis Partnership ● Urban Advantage Partnership ● NY Historical Society Partnership ● ASCD Membership ● NCTM Membership ● Conference & Travel Fees ● Supportive Books & Resources  Data Partnership with District Public  Teacher Per Session   Principal Per Session  Per Diem/Coverage Funds Supervisory Per Session Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) Title I SWP X Title I TA Title III PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Mid-Point progress benchmarks will occur at the end of each trimester in December, March and June Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress.  School-wide Action Plan Benchmarks Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 31  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 6 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 6.2 The school leader ensures that regular communication with students and families fosters their high expectations for student academic achievement. 6.3 The school engages in effective planning and reciprocal communication with family and community stakeholders so that student strength and needs are identified and used to augment learning. 6.4 The school community partners with families and community agencies to promote and provide training across all areas (academic and social and emotional developmental health) to support student success. 6.5 The school shares data in a way that promotes dialogue among parents, students, and school community members centered on student learning and success and encourages and empowers families to understand and use data to advocate for appropriate support services for their children. SOP(s) Addressed x NA NA NA Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 1. Strengths ● Teachers maintain parent contact through phone calls, text messaging, meetings and log on school Intranet ● According to our 2016-2017 School Quality Review, we are well-developed in communicating high expectations to families ● According to our 2016-2017 NYC School Survey, 100% of parents say they feel welcome in our school. 2. Needs According to our 2016-2017 School Survey: ● 28% of parents say they have had the opportunity to volunteer time to support the school 2018-19 SCEP-FL 32  ● 63% of parents say they have been invited to visit classrooms to observe instruction Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, there will be a 10% increase in parental participation as measured by the annual School Survey. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 33  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) The parent coordinator will coordinate a list of monthly volunteer opportunities and communicate them to all parents. Parents Parents will be invited to observe classroom instruction and presentations a minimum of three times per year during each trimester's intersession Parents Parents will be surveyed on ways they would like to contribute to the school Parents October 2017-June 2018 Parent Coordinator, Teacher Teams, AP, Principal December 2017, March 2018, June 2018 Teachers, Team Leaders Intersession Coordinator, Students, AP September 2017-June 2018 Parent Coordinator, AP, Principal 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. N/A Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. ● Parent Coordinator ● Teacher Teams ● Newsletter Coordinator  ● Refreshments ● Books ● Copies 2018-19 SCEP-FL 34  ● Supplies ● Metro cards for Parents Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) Title I SWP X Title I TA Title III PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Mid-Point Progress Reports will take place at the end of each trimester: December, 2018; March, 2019; June, 2019. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress.  Parent survey on the volunteer and classroom observation opportunities presented in the school, aligned with School Survey questions Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 35  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Mathematics Science Social Studies Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) ● 100% of students scoring Level 1 on NYS ELA Exam ● 100% of Students assessed with specific foundational skill needs ● 100% of students reading 3 TC Reading levels below grade level ● 100% of students scoring Level 1 on NYS Math Exam ● 100% of students assessed with specific foundational skill needs ● 100% of students who fail unit assessments ● 100% of students who fail unit assessments ● Mastery-based Clinics Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) ● Mastery-based instructional Clinics ● Small group instruction ● Guided Reading Groups ● Mastery-based instructional Clinics ● Small group instruction ● Mastery-based instructional Clinics ● Small group instruction ● Peer Tutoring ● Guided Reading & DBQs ● Small group instruction ● Peer Tutoring When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) ● During the school day, after school, Saturdays (Depending on funding) ● Before school, after school, Saturdays (Depending on funding) ● During the school day, after school, Saturdays (Depending on funding) ● After school, Saturdays (Depending on Instruction) ● After school, Saturdays (Depending on Instruction) 2018-19 SCEP-FL 36 ● Solution-Focused Group Counseling ● Small Groups ● Individual ● Solution-Focused Individual Counseling ● During the school day, after school, Saturdays (Depending on funding) ● Art Therapy At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) ● Students identified through Grade Team Meetings ● Students identified through Culture Team Meetings ● Students referred by parents ● Students who request services 2018-19 SCEP-FL 37  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 28 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. We will offer the following supports:  Counseling to the students in school  Parent workshops  Referrals to outside agencies  Purchase school supplies and uniforms for the students  Cover the cost of trips  Have incentives for students to come to school (luncheons, special trips, etc.)  Metro cards for parents' transportation to School Meetings & Events  Toiletries & Personal Needs  Ensure that attendance teachers/ school personnel conduct home visits as necessary  Ensure that staff understand the McKinney-Vento Act and collaborate on best practices to engage and assist students within the classroom Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). 26 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 38  School Uniforms Toiletries & Personal Needs Parent Transportation to School Meetings & Events School Supplies 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. NA 2018-19 SCEP-FL 39  Section 8: Title I Program Information Directions:  All schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. ● Recruitment of highly qualified staff through NYC Select Recruits Program, NYC Teaching Fellows Program, Open Market ● Professional Development Partnerships with Common Core Aligned Programs:, TCRWP, Metamorphosis Teaching, Facing History & Ourselves, Urban Advantage Science Program ● Participation in professional organizations and conferences including ASCD, NCTM, etc. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the strategies and activities for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, staff, and paraprofessionals that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). ● Professional Development Partnerships with Common Core Aligned Programs:, TCRWP, Metamorphosis Teaching, Facing History & Ourselves, Urban Advantage Science Program Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. NA 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). 2018-19 SCEP-FL 40  NA Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/information, early intervention services, etc.). NA 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction.  Teachers will review assessments aligned with the NYS Exams and MOSL exams from at least 3 vendors and select the most closely aligned exams for use as benchmark assessments  Teachers will select previous NYS Exam items for use as On-Demand assessment of student progress towards meeting learning standards  Teachers will utilize TCRWP On-Demand Assessments in Writing for 4 units of study: Narrative, Informational, Personal Narrative, Poetry  Teacher will utilize TCRWP Running Record Assessments to assess student reading progress  Teachers will use the data from the NYS Exam results, the benchmark exams that the students will take three times throughout the year and On-Demands in both ELA and Math.  Teachers will discuss student data and instructional practices in their weekly team meetings and with TCRWP and Metamorphosis coaches 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds enables, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (SCEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Column B Section Reference(s) Title I Part A (Basic) Federal NA 2018-19 SCEP-FL 41 Title I School Improvement 1003(a) Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funds Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 16,979 39,350 2,410,480 X X X Sections 5a-e Section 5E, 6 Sections 5a-e 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I School Improvement 1003(a): To support implementation of school improvement activities identified through the Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) reviews or a school review with district oversight and included in the DCIP/SCEP.  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: To support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 42   Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan.  Title I Priority and Focus School Parent Engagement Set-aside: Additional set-aside is to enable greater and  more meaningful parent participation in the education of their children. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.  Grant funds awarded via a competitive process, including Title I 1003(g) SIG funds: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 43  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. Pugsley Golden Academy, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. [Pugsley Golden Academy] will support parents and families of Title I students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; 2018-19 SCEP-FL 44  ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; and  The school’s Parent Involvement Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; 2018-19 SCEP-FL 45  provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report;  host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the ESSA; ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help. The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 46 School-Parent Compact (SPC)  School-Parent Compact (SPC) Pugsley Golden Academy, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; 2018-19 SCEP-FL 47  ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year. Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences. I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; 2018-19 SCEP-FL 48  ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs. II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; 2018-19 SCEP-FL 49  Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 50  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): K 6 1 7 2 8 3 9 4 10 5 11 12 2018-19 SCEP-FL 51  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: Based on student performance on the 2015-2016 NYSESLAT, there is a strong need to focus on our ENL students' growth in English language proficiency levels. The majority of students show a need for enrichment services in language skills relating to speaking, listening, reading and writing. The before, after and Saturday school ENL programs will focus on building English proficiency to support the academic curriculum, as well as beginning literacy skills for newcomers. This program will build the English language literacy skills and math skills of approximately sixty-five ENLs. It will run for approximately fifteen weeks starting on December 5, 2017 and ending on June 16, 2018. The program will be held on Tuesdays and Thursdays from 7:20-8:20 am; Wednesdays, Thursdays, and Fridays from 3:10 - 4:40 pm and Saturdays from 9:00 - 12:00 pm. Three ENL certified teachers and one bilingual certified teacher will instruct a total of sixty-five ENLs in grades six through eight who scored Entering, Emerging, Transitioning, Expanding or Commanding on the 2015-2016 NYSESLAT or are newcomers. The bilingual licensed teacher will teach students in grade seven. The ENL and bilingual teachers will focus on basic math and literacy skills to serve as a foundation to the skills required to achieve mastery on the state assessments, including literacy and language acquisition skills. During the Saturday program, students will receive 3 hours of ELA instruction according to their data-based need. An administrator, either the principal or the assistant principal, will be present at the sessions to supervise the program and to provide supervision and instructional support to the Title III program. This will be at no cost to the program. The literacy component of the before, after and Saturday school ENL programs will aim to build literacy skills and cross-cultural connections through leveled book study. Based on our 2015-2016 NYSESLAT scores and formative assessments, students need additional support in reading and writing. This program will not only prepare students for state exams (ELA, Math, and NYSESLAT), but it will also strive to cultivate well-rounded students through the use of culturally rich literature. Instructional strategies will be used to develop: • Familiarity with idiomatic expressions • Language appropriate to social situations • Reinforcement of vocabulary found in content area instruction • Active participation in all four modalities of language (speaking, listening, reading and writing), with a focus on literacy In the Math class, students will build knowledge of academic vocabulary pertaining to mathematics and foundational Math skills to prepare them for the New York State Math Exam. The literacy teachers of the ENL programs will utilize leveled book study, NewsELA, NYSESLAT Exam preparation materials, Engage NY mathematics materials and math literature. Additional resources that will be used to supplement the curriculum include: 2018-19 SCEP-FL 52  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information • NYSESLAT Exam Prep Books (supplemental materials) • Manipulatives, i.e.: sight word flash cards, etc. • General instructional supplies, i.e.: chart paper, markers, post-its, reading and writing notebooks, etc. The data analysis is conducted using results from NYSCCLS exams, NYSESAT exam, NYSITELL, Running Records, pre-and post-assessments and daily student-teacher interactions. We provide the students with IPads and bilingual dictionaries. We use the TC Curriculum materials to support our ENL students. Letters are translated into home languages of our ENL students by the DOE Translation Services. The ENL teachers follow the ICT model of instruction and co-teach with the Humanities teachers on each grade level. The teachers pull small groups as well as a stand alone ENL class twice a week. Some of the activities that students will participate in are real life speaking scenarios, role playing, as well as using speaking as a platform for writing. Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: Title III funding will be used to support a teacher study group after school, expand upon the work of inquiry teams, and integrate other components such as language objectives and lesson study planning and implementation. Teacher professional development sessions will be held on Tuesdays twice a month from January to June for one hour sessions from 4:30-5:30 PM for a total of 13 sessions. Topics to be discussed will include: - a close reading of CCLS rubrics and their implications for ENLs (2 sessions on 1/9 and 1/23) - data analysis and unit revisions for ENLs (4 sessions on 2/6, 2/13, 3/6, 3/20) - unit assessment data analysis, reflection on the implementation of units and design of subsequent units based on the data (3 sessions on 4/10, 4/24, 5/8 ) - Study Group: Using the SIOP Model (5/15, 5/29) - Study Group: Using the SIOP Model (6/5, 6/12) The teachers will engage with an appropriate professional text, Using the SIOP Model: Professional Development Manual for Sheltered Instruction. The group will also address next steps for specific students and subgroups in the Title III program to support their English language acquisition and native language support where necessary. The ENL Study Group participants will include the ENL teacher, a bilingual teacher, three humanities teachers and the Assistant Principal. The ENL teacher and bilingual teacher will participate and be funded through the Title III instructional program. The humanities teachers teach classes during the school day that have a high number of ENLs. The target audience for these sessions will be both teachers of ENLs and the coach/administrator for each group to support one another to successfully implement and support the Title III program and their ENL students in the current 2018-19 SCEP-FL 53  Part C: Professional Development school year and beyond. The Assistant Principal will consult with our Teacher's College Reading and Writing Project coaches to ensure full alignment and integration with our literacy program. The PDs that our ENL teachers receive comes from the Department of ELLs as well TC. Teachers also research on their own, PDs offered at local colleges/universities that they are interested in attending and consult with the principal on whether they many attend. The PDs will positively impact the progress of ELLs by the teachers having a variety of instructional to work with the students in all content areas. This is at no cost to the program. All records including attendance sheets, agendas, and invitations to parents are kept on file in the main office. Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: Families of ENLs at Blueprint will receive opportunities to develop their role as their child's most important teacher and advocate. We want families to be able to learn more about the educational needs of their children so they can effectively support them. There are a variety of topics that families can learn more about in order to support their children. We will offer ENL families workshops on topics, including but not limited to: -the high school admission process and programs tailored to ENL students(10/16 with Counselors, Ms.Gutierrez and Ms. Hall) - understanding Common Core Learning Standards and specific supports for ENL students (1/22 with Bilingual teacher Mr. Rivera and ENL Teacher, Mr. Wilken) - learning about the ELA exam and strategies to support ENLs (3/12 with Humanities Teacher, Ms. Perez) - learning about the NYS Math Exam and strategies to support ENLs (4/15 with Ms. Wang, Math Teacher) - the NYSESLAT and how to support students for success on this exam (3/27 with ENL Teacher, Mr. Wilken) - continuing a Culture of Reading, using reading strategies to support ENLs, over the summer (6/18 with Principal, Ms. Harrington). These workshops occur monthly on Mondays, 6:00-7:00 pm in October, then from January through June and are supported by school personnel, including the school leaders, counselors, teachers and the parent coordinator. The workshop's facilitator have been decided based on strengths in a specific topic, including certification and professional experience. Written communication is always translated into Spanish and oral translation is available in Bengali and Spanish by school staff members to ensure the most impact of the resources. Families are invited through flyers, calendars backpacked home and followed up by phone calls. Snacks will be provided. All records including attendance sheets, agendas, and invitations to parents are kept on file in the main office. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 54  Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. N/A Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits) N/A  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 SCEP-FL 55  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 08 School Name Pugsley Prep for S.T.E.A.M./Blueprint Mi Borough Bronx School Number 562 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Tyneka Harrington Coach type here ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Natalie Perez Teacher/Subject Area Nicholas Wilken/ELA Teacher/Subject Area Jose Rivera/Science Related-Service Provider Allegra Levine Superintendent Karen Ames Assistant Principal Coach type here School Counselor Denise Gutierrez Parent Jettina Knox Parent Coordinator Emily Ramos Field Support Center Staff Member Madeline Sevarain Other (Name and Title) type here C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 1 0 1 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 1 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 2 0 6 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] D. Student Demographics 2018-19 SCEP-FL 56  Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 697 Total number of ELLs 123 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 17.65% Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 1 3 2 4 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 5 0 6 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 7 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 8 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 9 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? Our school uses TCRWP Running Records to assess literacy skills for our ELLs. We have also reviewed the results of the 2017-2018 NYSESLAT in depth to identify student trends and needs in all grade levels. Most students scoring within the Entering range of proficiency according to the NYSESLAT are those who have been in an English Language system for three years or less. Students scoring within the Emerging and Transitioning range of proficiency are generally identified as Developing ELLs. All students mandated to participate in the NYSESLAT exam during the current academic year receive ENL services during their daily program as push-in or team-teaching support in the area of English Language Arts. With respect to assessments, LEP students are given all examinations first in the language of instruction, with a supplemental examination in the students’ 2018-19 SCEP-FL 57  native language for reference. Students given access to the general education curriculum with ENL support provided through a push-in model are expected to make significant gains in proficiency in all four modals. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? We identify and address student weaknesses and target areas for growth on a continuous basis. Discussions with teachers take place during weekly grade team meetings and include feedback from all education stakeholders (Guidance counselor, speech teacher, reading teacher, other support staff) to provide a comprehensive plan of student supports; analysis of student data during dedicated periodic data review sessions; and multi-disciplinary teacher team discussions focusing on supportive teaching strategies that can be used across discilplines to support student engagement and learning such as scaffolding. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? We evaluate the success of our programs for ELLs using multiple quantitative and qualitative data points. First, every student in our school completes a TCRWP leveled reading assessment at least three times per year. This assessment allows our teachers and school leaders to evaluate the effectiveness of our small-group leveled reading program which serves to accelerate students’ reading proficiency. Students’ improved reading proficiency as measured by these assessments is one way in which we evaluate the success of the program provided to ELLs. ELLs also take a pre-assessment, mid-year assessment, and end-of-year assessment in the ENL standalone class. These assessments are used to track growth, as well as determine areas of focus. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? Once summative data has been gathered classroom teachers review and analyze the data in teams to identify patterns, trends and create action plans to address the specific needs of students. There is an iterative review process among the teaching team where they are reviewing the impact of interventions to determine efficacy and if pedagogical strategy adjustments are needed to maximize student achievement . 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] N/A 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. We look at all NYS exam data as a measure to inform our ELL programs. After looking at our data, we are observing that there is a relation among the performance level of students on the NYSESLAT Reading and Writing and their performance on the ELA state exam. General trends from the 2017-2018 school year indicate that students in all grades consistently demonstrate the highest levels of proficiency in the speaking portion of the NYSESLAT. This can be attributed to the fact that English Language Learners practice speaking skills in all content areas throughout the school day, as well as during push-in and standalone ENL instruction. Additionally, all teachers incorporate cooperative learning activities into daily lessons to encourage spoken language proficiency of all students, especially English Language Learners. In contrast, students have demonstrated the lowest levels of proficiency in reading comprehension. This need is being addressed to make improvements within the writing portion of the NYSESLAT assessment. There is a school-wide focus on writing instruction across content-areas. This can be attributed to collaborative efforts of ENL and content area teachers focusing upon strengthening all students’ writing skills across grade level curriculum. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? Weekly team meetings serve as an opportunity to share data findings, disseminate information on trends, and promote best practices to serve students in our ELL population. In addition, teachers routinely confer with students to help them understand their progress, areas of strength and growth to foster active engagement in their learning process. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 58  Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. 1A. Students are divided into three ungraded groups, according to their proficiency levels: Entering, Emerging/Transitioning, and Expanding. Students receive ENL stand alone instruction twice a week for 45 minutes per session. Outside of ENL, students receive push-in services in ELA. b. TBE program. If applicable. N/A c. DL program. If applicable. N/A 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? All students mandated to participate in the NYSESLAT exam during the current academic year are programmed to receive ENL services during their daily program as push-in or co-teaching support in ELA. Students who demonstrate NYSESLAT results within the Entering, Emerging, Transitioning, and Expanding proficiency range are also programmed to receive small group stand alone ENL for two 45-minute periods per week. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. In all grades, content area instruction is delivered in ELA. Humanities, Science, Mathematics, and the Electives are provided in English with ENL supports (scaffolding, translations when appropriate, visual aids, and bilingual glossaries). Further, teachers provide scaffolds which provide students access to the content or critical thinking required within the curriculum in the native language when appropriate. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? For those students who are identified as SIFE, we use the NYSITELL and school-based reading and Math assessments to identify students’ levels of mastery within the grade level curriculum. In addition, the NYSITELL is provided for those SIFE students who indicate a home language other than English (upon enrollment). Students are evaluated in their native language in consultation with the ENL provider. Students present oral reports, engage in classroom discussions which are evaluated by teachers, and complete reading and writing tasks which are both provided in Spanish and aligned with the CCLLS. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status 2018-19 SCEP-FL 59  A balanced literacy instructional approach along with the use of relevant context, an emphasis on key vocabulary and multiple styles of learning are used in instructional practice to make content comprehensible and to enrich language development. Instruction for ELLs is differentiated according to their proficiency level and individual needs. Our instructional plan for ELLs in school less than three years is to provide push-in instruction to target vocabulary work and native language support (in Spanish). Since NCLB now requires ELA testing for ELLs after one year we also plan to support these ELLs by familiarizing them with the ELA testing format and vocabulary while also using guided, scaffolded instruction that integrates strategies and skills similar to those incorporated into the exam. Students classfied as SIFE, are supported with push-in services. Those students who are identified as SIFE we use the LAB-R and school-based reading and Math assessments to identify students' levels of mastery within the grade level curriculum. These students are provided small group support by content-area teachers within content-area instruction in order to differentiate and address students' learning and linguistic needs. Finally, students are provided enrichment throughout the school day and access to after school programs for small group instructional support and experiential learning in order to further build background knowledge and provide students' with relevant, non-classroom experiences that support instructional outcomes. ELL subgroups experience differentiated, small-group literacy instruction rooted in students' independent reading levels and aligned with NYSESLAT outcomes. Those students performing within the beginner range also have an opportunity to participate in additional intensive, small group literacy instruction. In order to enhance all ELL students' language proficiency, language support is provided as a part of the general education curriculum. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? In order to best serve our ELLs with special needs we take into account the styles and settings in which these students learn best and differentiate our instruction to meet their needs. Instructional materials including technology used to support ELLs include providing content in as many ways as possible so that students can see it, read it, write it, and practice speaking it. We also use Vocabulary practice (cards, foldables, journals etc.), and skills/standards focused resources. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? Instruction is delivered to ELLs in a push-in collaborative co-teaching model. A balanced literacy instructional approach along with the use of relevant contexts, an emphasis on key vocabulary and multiple styles of learning are used in instructional practice to make content comprehensible and to enrich language development. In addition to the use of small-group instruction and student-specifc scaffolding, all ESL services and Special Education Teacher Support and ICT services are provided through a push-in model of support in order to provide students with access to the curriculum in the least restrictive environment. All ELL-SWDs also receive supplemental, small-group reading instruction based upon independent reading levels. This program is provided to all students, including those who are identified as English proficient. These practices ensure that all students have access to the grade-level curriculum, thereby advancing students through content as they achieve their IEP goals and develop English proficiency. Instructional aids for ELL SWDs may include the use of graphic organizers, pictures and visual aids, diagrams and charts, in addition to the instructional aids and strategies outlined in the student's IEP. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. Targeted Interventions for ELLs in ELA, MATH, Social Studies and Science include but not limited to the following: -A Balanced Literacy Approach -Academically Rigorous Instruction -Differentiated instruction -Periodic/Interim Assessments -Contextualization 2018-19 SCEP-FL 60  -Extended day and after school programs that focus primarily on literacy and mathematics. -Instruction provided to students is driven by students' identified levels or identified areas in need of improvement. -Ongoing assessment provides evidence of student learning and need for changes to drive instruction. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? We are actively seeking to implement a Dual Language program utilizing a 50/50 model. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? All programs available during the 2017-18 school year will be continued next school year. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. All ELL students are fully integrated into our school community. Upon enrollment they along with their family receive an orientation, which highlights the programmatic offerings at our school. ELLs are provided access to all content areas through the push-in model of ESL service delivery. Additionally, all ELLs participate in an Electives program that gives them access to math and literacy skills through high interest content. Finally, all ELLs are enrolled in the school-based afterschool program at no cost to families. Long-term and former ELLs are provided supplemental content-area support as a part of the afterschool program. During this time ELLs may participate in a variety of activities including sports and clubs. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. Teachers utilize a broad range of instructional materials to support ELLs. This includes Mimio technology, iReady, Reading A-Z, and Rosetta Stone in order to support students who are identified as ELLs as well as all other students in the classroom. Other materials, in addition to texts and workbooks, also include bi-lingual translation dictionaries, glossaries, hand held translators, manipulatives, and audio books. Additionally, teachers provide students with content-area materials in students' native language(s) when appropriate. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? ESL support is provided through a push-in, co-teaching model. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. At the middle school level it is essential that students have access to all of the content within regular classroom instruction. As a result, all services are provided within the content-area classrooms in order to ensure students' needs are met using methods and content reflective of the grade-level curriculum. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? The two middle schools in the building are being consolidated, so the resources of both schools will be utilized to ensure that all academic, linguistic and socio-emotional needs of ELLS continue to be met. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). Newly-arrived ELLs are assisted by the Business Manager, guidance counselor and the language teachers before the beginning of the school year. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? None 18. For schools with dual language programs: 2018-19 SCEP-FL 61  a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? N/A Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? At our school, the primary goal for professional development is to ensure that all faculty are engaged in professional discourse, learning, and reflection. The school provides support for our ELLs by providing high quality teachers. Weekly departmental meetings seek to define and implement the school's integrated curriculum. We have TCRWP PD that assist our teachers with strategies on emergent reading strategies. We have PDs on building vocabulary. Teachers work collaboratively to implement strategies using UDL. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. Ongoing professional development is provided to all staff who service ELL students. All staff members are encouraged to attend school and network opportunities for ELL professional development and are encouraged to obtain a bilingual or ESL extension. Annually, we have a week long orientation in August before school starts and we limit the number of teachers our students have. In addition to ESL support, all content area teachers incorporate ESL strategies into classroom instruction. Teachers participate in professional development sessions (a total of 7.5 hours) focusing upon ESL language instruction across content areas. Instructional staff use multiple resources, including Building Academic Vocabulary by John Marzano and Classroom Instruction That Works with English Language Learners by Jane D. Hill and Kathleen M. Flynn to improve content area instruction for ELL students in all content areas. Staff also work collaboratively to implement strategies driven by the Universal Design for Learning in order to ensure that all students have access to curricula regardless of students' level of English proficiency. All instructional staff members including the principal, ESL coordinator, content area teachers, guidance counselor, and Special Education teachers are thoroughly trained in backwards planning and models of explicit vocabulary instruction that is rooted in data and language need. All of the aforementioned school staff utilize strategies from professional development and ample co-planning opportunities with ESL certified staff to ensure differentiation based upon the linguistic and learning needs of ELLs across the curriculum. We keep a chart of ELL related PDs attended. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? We have Orientation meetings for our parents as well as annual parent meetings, parent nights/celebrations, and regular communication with our parents and teachers that is logged by the teachers. All of these opportunities to engage with our 2018-19 SCEP-FL 62  families strengthen the home school connection. All meetings have language interpreters from among the staff to ensure that all families can fully participate. This also deepens the home school connection and family's connection to out teaching team. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Our school has a strong commitment to our parents and community especially parents of ELLs, to ensure a smooth transition process. Our school creates an atmosphere of open communication with parents through school wide encouragement of second language through materials and communication. In addition to the trimester report card conferencing, parents are kept informed and updated via several forms of communication, including a monthly parent calendar, well planned informational sessions tailored to address the specific needs of our ELL community, open access to our teachers, staff and related services, i.e., counseling to address academic and or behavioral needs their children may have. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Our school will be consolidated during the upcoming school year 2018-2019. All of the resources available at both schools will be utilized to continue meeting the needs of our ELL population. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 63 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Tyneka Harrington, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 64  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: School DBN: Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Tyneka Harrington Title Principal Assistant Principal Emily Ramos Parent Coordinator Natalie Perez ENL/Bilingual Teacher Jettina Knox Parent Nicholas Wilken Teacher/Subject Area Jose Rivera Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach Denise Gutierrez School Counselor Karen Ames Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 06/14/18 06/14/18 06/14/18 06/14/18 06/14/18 06/14/18 06/14/18 06/14/18 06/14/18 2018-19 SCEP-FL 65  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 08X562 School Name: Blueprint Middle School Superintendent: Karen Ames The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No (*Primary) * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. Based on the Home Language Identification Survey, a record of adult preferred languages for written translation and oral interpretation are maintained in ATS: Spanish - 26% , Bengali - 16%; Arabic - 2.3%; Copies of said information are shared with our Guidance Counselor, Parent Coordinator, Business Manager, and others. All written correspondence between the school and students’ families is provided in the language of their choice, which most often is in their native language. As a result, we use the NYCDOE’s internal translation unit to provide translations of all school correspondence in Arabic, Bengali, French, Haitian-Creole, and Spanish including: a. Announcing important meeting dates (Open School Night, SLT meetings, PTSSA meetings, etc.) 2018-19 SCEP-FL 66  b. Special events (Sweet Thanks, Townhall Meetings, etc.) c. Letters of concern about students’ academic performance and behavior d. Letters of congratulations praising student performance and behavior e. Orientation & welcome packets for families explaining school rules, mission, necessary supplies, permission slips, and FAQs about school policy, which they receive upon admitting their child to our school . 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Language Spanish Arabic Bengali 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. a. Announcements for important meeting dates (Open School Night, SLT meetings, Parent Association meetings, etc.) b. Special events (Sweet Thanks, Town Hall Mtgs., student performances and parent teacher conferences) 2018-19 SCEP-FL 67  c. Letters of concern about students’ academic performance and behavior d. Letters of congratulations praising student performance and behavior e. Welcome packets for families explaining school rules, mission, necessary supplies, permission slips, f. FAQs about school policy, which they receive upon admitting their child to our school 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide interpretation service(s)? We hold monthly PTSSA meetings, as well as montly SLT meetings. We additionally hold Parent Workshops. Additionally, our Parent Coordinator makes daily outreach to families in regards to communication about school events, individual student issues, etc. Our guidance counselors regularly reach out to families in regards to individual students' academic progress towards graduation. Our Deans and Social worker additionally make calls to families and meet face-to-face. Teachers are expected to maintain regular communication with families regarding students' progress. Our parent Coordinator makes daily phone calls in regards to absences. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 68  Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) Chancellor's Regulation A-663 is a directive on the responsibility that our school system is committed to for the opportunity of equal access to all rights, opportunity, information, and participation of LEP parents in our school. A parent will never be denied access to opportunities afforded their families, or to children enrolled at our school. As a result of these regulations, we have developed systems that will meet the needs of parents of ELLs who speak the predominant second language, Spanish, Bengali, Arabic and less prevalent languages represented in our school. Additionally, Item B of Section VII in the Chancellor's Regulations relates to the conspicuous posting of DOE covered languages for translation. This appears upon entry to the school near the Main Office. The school's safety plan provides that parents who need to communicate with the school, does so in their home language. This is determined via the Parents Preferred Language Form, which is available as part of the Family Resources through the Office of ELLs. School based and consultant agencies will be utilized to this end, including community based organizations that will be instrumental in meeting the language needs of our parents. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? Surveys will be given and feedback solicited during monthly PTSSA meetings regarding the quality and availability of interpretation services and of key documents translated into home languages. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 69 
