2018-19 COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (CEP-CS) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): School Name: 07X584 I.S. 584 Principal: TANNIS SERTIMA 2018-19 CEP-CS 1  Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC)   School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information I.S. 584 320700010584 6-8 School Number (DBN): 07x584 600 Saint Ann's Avenue Bronx, NY 10455 718-742-2900 Phone Number: 718-292-5735 Fax: TannisSertima TSertima@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: TannisSertima Jennifer Reyes Emily Garcia Email Address: Parents’ Association President: Samantha Berardino SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): Ericka Mejia CBO Representative: Samantha Berardino District Information Geographical District: 7 Superintendent’s Office Address: RafaelAlvarez Superintendent: 501 CourtlandtAve. Rm. 102 Bronx, NY 10451 ralvare4@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718-742-6500 Phone Number: FSC: Bronx 718-742-6548 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) Nancy Saffer Executive Director:   1230 ZeregaAvenue Bronx, NY 10462/One FordhamPlaza, Bronx, NY 10458 Executive Director’s Office Address: nsaffer@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: Phone Number: Fax: 718-828-7776/718-741-8895 718-828-6280   Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) TannisSertima Jennifer Reyes Emily Garcia MercedelliGraciano Kenya Franklin Samantha Berandino BalaDhareneni Tara Glover Carmen Cruz *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable/ Member/Teacher Member/Teacher Member/Parent   Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Mrs. Barnes Ms. Hankerson Member/Parent Member/Parent Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/   Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with   the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement   Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? The overall mission of IS 584 is to provide our students with the academic and personal foundation necessary to successfully pursue advanced studies and attain personal growth as global citizens. Our school will create a demanding, socially conscious environment that involves students, parents, teachers, staff and administration actively participating in the educational experience of each child. Our curriculum of study will be infused with STEAM, Project-based Learning and Dual Language (in the 6th & 7th grade). We will encourage the intellectual curiosity, critical   thinking, creativity and problem solving skills of our students, which will enable them to face our diverse society as confident lifelong learners and leaders fully prepared for the 21st century. IS 584 will:  provide a place where all students feel comfortable, safe and accepted.  promote open communication between home and school, encouraging teamwork and cooperation. acknowledge and celebrate the achievements of our students, their families and staff in our learning  community. focus on increased student achievement with instructional methods that reflect current research and proven effective classroom practices i.e.: STEAM, Projects Based Learning, and Dual Language.  The mission of IS 584's STEAM program is to provide a well-rounded education for all of our students by offering: learning through a unique, experiential and collaborative process;   be inspired to be creative, and become critical and analytical thinkers;  have one-to-one access to technology (chromebooks). Through in-house supports and with our community-based partners, IS 584 will create educational opportunities for our students that will broaden their experience and meet future school and workforce needs. The mission of IS 584's Project-Based Learning curriculum features real world, authentic learning tasks that engage and motivate students through a technology-infused approach to teaching and learning. It is our belief that students learn best when they create high-quality, authentic products and presentations connected to their learning. The mission of IS 584's Dual Language Enrichment program is to ultimately ensure that our students are truly bilingual and bi-literate. Students receive accelerated instructional benefits from their peers as they engage in collaborative learning strategies. Dual language Enrichment at IS 584 improves student motivation and amplifies student progress. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. IS 584, a Community School, which serves grades 6 through 8, is located in the Melrose section of the Bronx. The total school population is a diverse group of approximately 300 students. The demographic breakdown of IS 584 is 22% Black, 74% Latino, 32.9% Special Education, 23.1% ELLs, 19.5% Temporary Housing. Our yearly target enrollment will continue to be 300 students in 6th, 7th and 8th grade. The Average Daily Attendance during the 2017 -2018 school year was consistently 92%, barring extreme weather conditions. During the 2018 - 2019 school year the school houses 4 sixth grade classes, 4 seventh grade classes, and 5 eighth grade classes. There will be 2 self-contained special education classes, 4 ICT (Integrated Co-Teaching) classes, 2 TBE (Transitional Bilingual), classes, 2 Dual Language (English/Spanish) classes, and 3 General Education classes. A TBE class on the 6th grade was not opened due to lack of enrollment (no 603 class).; however, the class will be reopened if students requiring a Transitional Bilingual class enroll. We are committed to an instructional focus of STEAM (Science, Technology, Engineering, Arts, and Mathematics), Project-Based Learning (PBL), and Dual Language Enrichment. STEAM education helps create critical thinkers, increases science literacy, and enables the next generation of innovators. Project-Based Learning (PBL) is an 0  innovative approach to learning that teaches a multitude of strategies critical for success in the twenty-first century. Students drive their own learning through inquiry, as well as work collaboratively to research and create projects that reflect their knowledge. The goal of our Dual Language program is to educate our students to become bilingual, bi-cultural and bi-literate. Family and community stakeholders were key partners in the development of IS 584. The academic core curriculum is supplemented with activities/projects to further develop student skills and strengths. Our community organization, West Hab, has partnered with various organizations (i.e., Creative Connections, Scholar STEM, Chess, Step in School, NYPD Explorers program) to enrich our students experiences. In our inaugural year (2017-2018) we focused on two components of the Framework for Effective Schools: Trust and Rigorous Instruction. As a new faculty coming in to work with the returning students, we knew the importance of building community, focusing on social emotional supports and establishing trust with our students. Through further analysis of the closing school's data the next immediate goal was to ensure that rigorous, high quality, core instruction was happening school-wide. By setting an intention in these two key areas, we were able to increase the percentage of students at proficiency at in ELA by 12 points, twice the gain of District 7 as a whole. In addition, we decreased our Level 1 students by 12 points in ELA, three times the amount of District 7 as a whole. Embedded within our daily schedule is common planning time, our teachers are afforded opportunities to collaborate and plan rigorous instruction and lessons. During the 2017 -2018 school year our school-wide instructional focus was Danielson, 3b: Questioning and Discussion; specifically, student-led discussion. Throughout the school year we initiated a school-wide discussion protocol (2 by 2 Discussion Protocol), which we will continue use and build the capacity of our school community. Specifically, teacher capacity is built through peer observations and mentor partnerships within their content and grade level in addition to 1:1 mentorships, staff professional development to demonstrate various differentiation techniques and methods of assessing student understanding. According to the 2017 - 2018 Student Perception Survey, 74% of our students felt that teachers holds them to high expectations around effort, understanding, persistence and performance in the classroom. In addition, our students are offered Beats (music) class where they are learning to read and play music, Art class where they learn to calm their minds and relax while creating beautiful art pieces, as well as participate in a variety of after school offerings such as: choir, chorus, Knight Zone, Futsol, basketball, and dance. Our after school opportunities will expand for the 2018 - 2019 school year based on student interest. In addition, our students benefit from daily access to one-to-one technology (chromebooks), including SMART Boards, Promethean Boards, document cameras, programmable EV3 robots, also Computer Science (coding) class. IS 584 has a budding Saturday Enhancement program that offers a re-teach of strategies learned during the week in a smaller more relaxed grouping. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. IS 584 educates approximately 260 students within general education, special education and English Language Learners. Approximately 32.9% of our student population are special education students and 23.1% of our student population are ELL students and 19.5% of our students are living within temporary housing. In order to meet the social emotional needs of all of our students including our special student populations, we will be adopting the research-based R.U.L.E.R method (recognizing, understanding, labeling, expressing and regulating emotions) in every classroom in order to increase student's emotional intelligence. During the 2018 - 2019 school year we will have 2 self-contained special education classes (students within these specific classes receive differentiated instruction to meet their needs as per their IEP), 4 ICT (Integrated Co-Teaching) classes (students with IEPs within these specific classes are educated with age appropriate peers in the general education classroom), students in both settings have full and complete access to the general education curricula offered at IS 584. As evidenced through data collected during the 2017 - 2018 school year, the needs of our special education students vary from setting to setting. Students in our ICT classrooms need additional support in academic writing, engaging in discourse and self-monitoring strategies for their academic success. Students in our self-contained settings need additional supports in self-monitoring behaviors and regulating responses for increased 1  opportunities of independence and self-regulation. Overall, all students with special needs will receive the scaffolds and differentiated supports outlined in their IEPs with the overall goal of increasing independence, self-monitoring strategies and increased opportunities for flexible scheduling and access to less restrictive environments. During the 2018 - 2019 school year we will have approximately 67 students classified as English Language Learners (a student whose home language is not English and needs support learning English). For our ELL students we offer a Dual Language Enrichment Program (foster bi-literacy, biculturalism and bilingualism in English and Spanish) and a Transitional Bilingual Education program (foster the use of the home language in order to transition to monolingual instruction in English). As evidenced through data collected during the 2017 - 2018 school year the needs of our English Language Learners vary not only from classroom to classroom but from student to student. Our 2018 NYSESLAT results show that 70% of our English Language Learners moved up by at least one proficiency level or more. During this school year, we will create an inquiry group targeting the students who did not show progress and provide them targeted supported through both stand-alone and integrated instruction. A second inquiry group will target the needs of our ELLs with special needs and ensure alignment of strategies and supports throughout their instructional programs. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. During the 2017 - 2018 school year, IS 584 focused heavily, year one on one of the most important elements of the Framework for Great Schools: Trust. As a new school, we worked on building a strong foundation of trust with all of our stakeholders including parents, faculty, and students. In focusing on this element we were able to foster a strong foundation for another element of Framework for Great Schools: Supportive Environment. According to the Summative Feedback on the 2017 - 2018 Principal Performance Review, the District 7 former Superintendent, Richard Cintron, documented "Quality Review Indicator 1.4: Learning Environment- The principal has created a culture of mutual trust and positive attitudes by modeling these core beliefs on a consistent basis. The principal regularly attends professional learning experiences with staff members and assumes the mindset of a learner. All student and staff interactions are purposeful and help to ensure that all students are known well by multiple adults and that student voice is welcomed and respected. Outreach to parents is consistent in addressing their needs and informing parents about all of the many social-emotional and academic resources at their disposable to support them and their children. Students, parents and teachers all play a role in helping to create targeted programs for support and enrichment strengthening collaboration and ownership across the school." For the 2018 - 2019 school-year IS 584 will work to address and strengthen two additional elements of the Framework for Great Schools that are at the core of student achievement: Rigorous Instruction (challenging our students ability to think and question) & Collaborative Teachers (educators working together to lead instruction), while continuing to build trusting relationships with the entire school community. According to the 2018 preliminary State Exam results (includes scale score and performance level), the students of IS 584 made great gains towards proficiency (levels 3 and 4) in English Language Arts (ELA); however the results did not reflect gains in Mathematics. As compared to the 2017 ELA student data there was    a reduction in level 1 students from 61% to 41% on the 2018 State exam. an increase in level 2 students from 29% to 37% on the 2018 State exam. an increase in levels 3 and 4 from 9% to 22% on the 2018 State exam. The implications of these data are: 2     they confirm the essential need that assessments, learning objectives, and instructional strategies are closely aligned so that they reinforce one another. they identify learning and knowledge gaps of our students, and which learning standards to address more aggressively. they show that a double block of ELA instructional time was an effective approach they demonstrate that exposure to informational and literary texts, citing text-based evidence, increased writing across all content areas, and access to academic vocabulary across content areas have positive impacts on student learning and should be continued and intensified. Comparing the 2017 New York State Exam scores and the 2018 preliminary Math scores student data, there was  an increase in level 1 students from 71% to 76%.  a decrease in level 2 students from 24% to 19%.  an increase in level 3 and 4 students from 4% to 5%. The implications of these data are:   there is a need for an increase in Math instructional time within our school. teachers need to be effectively and continuously professionally developed, enabling to solidify mathematics foundations and build on what our students know.  math manipulatives and technology need to be be used more to improve Math instruction and learning. learning and knowledge gaps of our students, and which learning standards to address more aggressively  need to be identified. the essential needs are that assessments, learning objectives, and instructional strategies are closely aligned so that they reinforce one another. that our students must be explicitly taught how to accurately explain their mathematical thinking. l mastery of computation must be balanced to apply concepts to problem solving.    3  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 07X584 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 06,07,08 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 277 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual YES Dual Language YES Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient N/A % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance N/A # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 97.0% % Attendance Rate 95.3% % Reduced Lunch 23.1% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.7% 75.1% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 0.0% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 1.25 N/A N/A # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 22.2% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Yes N/A N/A 91.0% 2.5% 33.2% 24.2% 0.0% 0.7% 0 N/A 5.0% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 4  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. The 2017-2108 NYC School Quality Guide and NYC School Survey (in which all stakeholders: teachers, students and parents were surveyed) highlighted many areas of the Framework for Great Schools in which we have shown significant progress during our inaugural year. In the area of rigorous instruction, our areas of strength include the Common Core Shifts in Literacy where we scored a 93% which is in direct alignment to the city average. In Mathematics we scored a 96% which is 3% higher than the city average. Both data points indicate the push and high expectations for academic rigor in instruction that is directly aligned to the Common Core Shifts in both English Language Arts and Mathematics. These scores reflect a comparison in instructional rigor to that of the prior school. However, much work still needs to be done at IS 584 to improve the quality of instruction in all areas, especially in Mathematics. 2. More than 75% of the students electing to attend IS 584 (from the previous school) in 7th and 8th grade scored in Level 1 in ELA and/or Mathematics on the 2016-17 NYC exam. During the 2017 - 2018 school year we instituted Academic Intervention/RTI Services, which included:  HD Word (Really Great Reading) to address decoding, fluency and comprehension deficits  Teaching to Transform - fluency instruction to support increased comprehension of text  Hochman Writing strategies instruction across content-areas  Khan Academy in Mathematics  Great Leaps   Wordly Wise in Literacy for academic vocabulary acquisition  After-school Tutoring  iReady - Reading and Mathematics Saturday Enhancement These interventions were delivered in Tier 1 (in the core classroom), Tier 2 (small group) and Tier 3 (individual/intensive) formats during the school day (including ELT), after school (after ELT), on Saturdays and during vacation periods. Additionally, in order to improve their ability to address students' needs, teachers were provided with coaching from the Bronx Field Support Center, from school based coaches and from consultant coaches. Further, the school's ELA program featured the following:  ELA block (90 mins of ELA instruction daily)  Word Study embedded within the ELA block 5  Independent Reading embedded within the ELA block; access to rich in-class libraries   MyON available during ELT; students are also encouraged to use at home  Building reading stamina through book clubs The result demonstrated by the preliminary NYS ELA scores was:  The percentage of students scoring in Level 1 on the 2017-18 NYS ELA assessment reduced by 21%  The percentage of students scoring in Levels 3/4 on the 2017-19 NYS ELA assessment increased by 13% PRIORITY NEED The preliminary results of the NYS Mathematics assessment were:  The percentage of students scoring in Level 1 on the 2017-18 NYS Math assessment increased by 5%  The percentage of students scoring in Levels 3/4 on the 2017-18 NYS Math assessment increased by 1% In Grade 6 - the percentage of Level 1 students increased by 21% and the percentage of Level 3 students  decreased by 5% In Grade 7 - the percentage of Level 1 students decreased by 3% and the percentage of Level 3 students increased by 5% In Grade 8 - the percentage of Level 1 students increased by 7% and the percentage of Level 3 students remained at 3%   We noticed that the students struggled with computational skills and grade level prerequisite skills. The next steps in mathematics instruction will include strategies to :  An increase of Math instructional time from 6 periods (2017-18, 270 minutes) to 8 periods (2018-19, 360  minutes). Implement Formative Assessments at the beginning, middle & end of each lesson in all content areas to check for understanding.  Ensure that students develop number sense and fluidity in basic computational facts.  Enable students to problem solve collaboratively in small groups and be able to explain their reasoning and answers. With regard to teachers, 2017 - 2018 Advance data showed that 3d: Using Assessment in Instruction is the area in the most need of growth for pedagogues, if students are discussing and talking to one another in purposeful ways, then learning is enhanced. Additionally, teachers need additional support in providing immediate feedback rooted in assessment criteria to track student progress and provide intervention. Further, systems and structures to support student ownership of their work and their progress need to be in place. New teachers with 3 years or less of teaching experience will receive tiered differentiated professional development:  Year 1: Focusing on Domain 1: Planning & Preparation, Domain 2: Classroom Environment  Year 2: Focusing on Domain 1: Planning & Preparation and Domain 3: Instruction  Year 3: Focusing on Domain 3: Instruction Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified 6  priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, students will improve on problem solving, use discussion protocols, academic discourse (Number Talks), and academic vocabulary as part of IS 584's STEAM focus in order to support a minimum growth of 10% proficiency on the NYS Math exam. 7  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional   development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). School leaders will train and oversee the implementation of structured discussion protocols, higher-order questioning techniques and the use of assessment during Math instruction. All Teachers & Paraprofessionals September 2018- June 2019 Principal Assistant Principals  Academic interventions in mathematics will be implemented and monitored for fidelity of use.  Teachers will receive training on higher order thinking skills, Bloom’s Taxonomy, and developing question stems. All Teachers & Paraprofessionals September 2018- June 2019  Teachers will be professionally developed to be able to know and implement CMP3 and the alignment to CCLS. Southern Cross Consultancy Principal Assistant Principals Southern Cross Consultancy BFSC Borough Instructional Lead  The Dual Language math teacher will be provided with support in order to strengthen his ability to teach mathematics to students within the school Dual Language "roller coaster model" in both English and Spanish languages. Dual Language Math Teacher September 2018- June 2019 Math Lead Teacher Principal Assistant Principals  Teachers will receive training on conducting progress conferences with students in order to move student learning. All Teachers & Paraprofessionals September 2018- June 2019  During these conferences, teachers will track skills/concepts needed, student stamina, 8 Southern Cross Consultancy BFSC Borough Instructional Lead Math Lead Teacher Principal Assistant Principals Southern Cross  perseverance, and progress in building their Math mindset.  Teacher teams will plan for math-based projects to support students in applying their math knowledge and motivating their engagement in learning and using mathematical concepts All Teachers & Paraprofessionals September 2018- June 2019  Daily, weekly and monthly professional learning cycles geared towards planning for the development of standards-aligned unit plans that incorporate structured discussion protocols, higher-order questioning techniques and the use of assessment during instruction. All Teachers & Paraprofessionals September 2018- June 2019  School leaders will meet with teachers bi-weekly to discuss individual student progress, academic challenges and next steps for individualized instruction. All Teachers & Paraprofessionals September 2018- June 2019  Teacher Leaders will work with teachers to infuse PBL projects into the curriculum that can serve as practical assessments of student learning as well as to motivate interest. All Teachers & Paraprofessionals September 2018- June 2019 Consultancy Math Lead Teacher Principal Assistant Principals Southern Cross Consultancy Math Lead Teacher Principal Assistant Principals Southern Cross Consultancy Math Lead Teacher Principal Assistant Principals Math Teachers Principal Assistant Principals Teacher Leaders   School Leaders will develop a partnership with successful PBL & STEAM school: Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr. Academic Middle School in California. School Leaders will conduct 3 or more inter-visitations to successful PBL & STEAM schools that have been identified by Central. Principal Assistant Principals Central September 2018- June 2019  New Teachers (3 years or less) will receive targeted differentiated professional development in order to develop their pedagogy.  Year 1: Focusing on Domain 1: Planning & Preparation, Domain 2: Classroom Environment  Year 2: Focusing on Domain 1: Planning & Preparation and Domain 3: Instruction  Year 3: Focusing on Domain 3: Instruction New Teachers September 2018- June 2019 Principal Assistant Principals BFSC Borough Instructional Leads 9  3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. IS 584 will empower parents to know their involvement in their child’s education establishes "buy-in" and a sense of ownership in the classroom for their child(ren). We will Invite parents to be involved in the conversations concerning math instruction in our school, through an active PTA. During Open School Night, Parent Teacher Conference and the State of the School Address parents will learn about our math core curriculum, project based learning, AIS/RTI, and enrichment, as well as how to utilize technology at home to support students mathematical learning (i.e. Khan Academy, iReady, etc). This engagement will be on going throughout the school year facilitated by the faculty and administration via in school meetings and electronically. Our Parent Coordinator will provide parents with the cellular number of the PC phone to remain in contact after school hours (in cases of emergencies). Our intention is to provide parents tools needed to support their proficiency in math at home and in school. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. School leadership will ensure teachers are provided with adequate meeting and planning time embedded within the school day ( weekly grade band meetings and content area meetings) to collaborate on lessons and teaching strategies, and ensure rigor. Instructional resources, including Instructional consultants, master teachers, peer collaborative teachers, model teachers will be provided. Funds and time will be allocated for attendance at various conferences and professional development sessions. Schedule adjustments will be made in order to free teachers up for coaching, mentoring and professional development offerings. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring X SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Math By February 2019, students will demonstrate a minimum 5% increase in math proficiency based on the administration of both Cognitive Growth Assessment in Mathematics and Mock Math Assessments. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) 0  Cognitive Growth Math Assessment In-house Mock Math Simulations Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 1  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? Priority Needs The 2017-2108 NYC School Quality Guide and NYC School Survey (in which all stakeholders: teachers, students and parents were surveyed) highlighted many areas of the Framework for Great Schools in which we have shown significant progress during our inaugural year. In the area of supportive environment, our areas of strength include personal attention and support where we scored 60%, comparable to city averages and guidance where we scored 89% also comparable to city averages. Based on the 2017-2108 NYC School Quality Guide and NYC School Survey the greatest need expressed is to prevent bullying and the self regulation of student behaviors during instruction. Various policies, practices and structures have been created and put in place for the 2018-2019 school-year in order to address these top two priority needs. We have created and adopted a school-wide Behavioral Management Plan that delineated expectations for all classroom procedures and processes along with a detailed Behavioral Ladder of Referral. Teachers have been trained and all well versed on each of the documents and expectation for implementation. These streamlined processes will ensure improvement in classroom behavior and proactively prevent instances of bullying. We have also adopted PBIS as a school-wide behavior management system which employs a proactive approach towards managing student behaviors by highlighting and rewarding positive behaviors and expectations. Support in effective implementation of PBIS through training and guidance from the Bronx Field Support Center. Our in-house Community Based Organizations also assist with Behavioral Interventions through in-class, push-in supports, working with small groups of students in need of support with regulating their emotions, facilitating classroom restorative circles. Lastly, in order to address the varying social-emotional needs of our students we will be adopting the research-based R.U.L.E.R. Method in order to increase student's social emotional competencies. Next Steps:  Train all faculty and staff on the R.U.L.E.R Method and embed practices in daily instruction  Support for Academic Progress by creating innovative ways for students to help tutor each other, inform parents, and keep them up to date with their child's progress Including students in the planning of PBIS events   Expanding after-school programs for students such as recreational activities and student organizations in order to build student relationships 2   Utilize school based resources from NY Foundling. Single Shepherd, and the CBO West Hab to support  individual and groups of students Implement AVID advisory program in the 6th grade in order to strength students self-perceptions and provide support and guidance in their collegiate journey.  Teachers will be trained by Dave Beal, Author of "The Brain Power Classroom" on how to support student's social-emotional needs and provide on-site support and monitoring of the implementation of the 10 Essential Practices for Focus, Mindfulness and Emotional Wellness Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, teachers will effective use research based strategies to help students regulate their behaviors in order to be active participants in their learning and the academic curriculum as measured by a 15% reduction in the OORS reports and guidance referrals. 3  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional        development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Students will set, track and monitor their emotional intelligence goals with RULER. Students maintain a log in order to track their goals and reflect on their progress. Students will engage in monthly peer conferences to share their progress for the month and set new goals for the following month. All Students September 2018-June 2019 School-wide PBIS program will proactively encourage positive behaviors to support and reward students with enrichment experiences for making good decisions within our school community. All Students November 2018; February 2019; May 2019 Students will be engaged in project based learning in core subjects to activate their interest and engagement in the curriculum. Projects will provide entry points for students who would ordinarily be unable to access their standards based learning. All Students November 2018 - June 2019 Single Shepherds will continue serve as mentors to our students, providing real time support. Shepherds conduct daily check-ins with our most demanding students and weekly check-ins with the entire grade band they are assigned to, to foster resilience and gauge their mental health and well-being. All Students September 2018-June 2019 Principal Assistant Principals Teachers Paraprofessional Principal Assistant Principals Teachers Paraprofessionals Assistant CSD Teachers Teacher Leaders Administrators Principal Assistant Principals Teachers Paraprofessionals 4   NY Foundling will continue to provide immediate on-site mental health crisis support for our students and their families.  The SAPIS (Substance Abuse Prevention/Intervention Specialist) Worker will continue to provide counseling and intervention supports for our most at-risk students presenting with substance abuse behaviors  Students will experience the AVID (Advancement Via Individual Determination) curriculum to support their academic career to gains skills and knowledge to support self regulation as well as to begin college preparation. 6th Grade Students September 2018-June 2019 Single Shepherd NY Foundling Social Worker SAPIS Worker Principal Assistant Principals Teachers Paraprofessionals  During Faculty Inauguration (August 2018), BFSC All teachers specialist, Todd Alper, provided a PD of an overview of Universal (Tier I) interventions including: Positive Teacher-Student Relationships, Non-Contingent Attention, Response Strategies, Classroom behavioral expectations, procedures and routines.  This Universal (Tier 1) intervention series will continue throughout the 2018-19 academic school year.  Teachers will be trained by Dave Beal, Author of "The Brain Power Classroom" on how to support student's social-emotional needs and provide on-site support and monitoring of the implementation of the 10 Essential Practices for Focus, Mindfulness and Emotional Wellness.  West Hab will continue to provide supports through in-class push-in support, providing use with a Culture and Climate Specialist. West Hab will also continue to search for vendors and assist in contracting vendors to provide enrichment opportunities for all of our students. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Paraprofessionals September 2018-June 2019 BFSC (Specialized Student Support Lead) All teachers Paraprofessionals September 2018-June 2019 Dave Beal and Team All students September 2018-June 2019 Principal How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. The school leadership will have effective home-school communication via personal phone calls, Engrade, email, text messages, and robo calls. The school will stress to parents the importance of having an environment that is supportive 5  to learners. At Parent Teacher Conference students will share with their families the academic goals they have set for themselves, share self assessments of their work, and detail how they track their own progress. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. School leadership will ensure teachers are provided with adequate meeting and planning time embedded within the school day (via weekly grade band meetings and content area meetings) to collaborate on lessons and teaching strategies, and ensure rigor. Instructional consultants and teacher leaders (PCTs, Model Teachers, etc.) will be maintained to provide coaching and other supports to teachers. Funds will be allocated for attendance at various conferences and professional development sessions. Schedule adjustments will be made in order to free teachers up for coaching, mentoring and professional development offerings. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA C4E 21st Century Grant X SIG Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, there will be a minimum of 8% reduction in OORS reports compared to the number of reports made from September 2017 to February 2018. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. OORS Reports Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 6  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 1. The 2017-2108 NYC School Quality Guide and NYC School Survey (in which all stakeholders: teachers, students and parents were surveyed) highlighted many areas of the Framework for Great Schools in which we have shown significant progress during our inaugural year. In the area of collaborative teachers, our areas of strength include cultural awareness and inclusive classroom instruction, quality of professional development and peer collaboration where we scored comparable to city averages. PRIORITY NEED 2. The 2017-2108 NYC School Quality Guide and NYC School Survey as well as in-house anonymous student and teacher surveys have highlighted an area of priority needs: innovation and collective responsibility where we scored 57% in comparison to the city average of 79%. Therefore, in order to effectively target the collaborative teachers component of the framework for Great Schools we will focus our in-house professional development plan to go in-depth on the Four Facets of Effective Co-Instruction which includes: co-planning, co-teaching, co-assessing and co-reflecting and ensuring implementation through our observation and feedback cycles. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, teachers will embed effective co-teaching models in their daily lessons plans (depending on the task and purpose) and in their practice in order to effectively engage students and facilitate targeted supports for flexible groups based on students needs as measured by a 10% increase in teacher effectiveness in Danielson component 3C (student engagement). 7  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Principal Assistant Principals BFSC (Specialized Student Support Lead) Southern Cross Consultancy  Professional development (in large sessions, during real-time instruction, and differentiated professional development) and Coaching Support to be provided by BFSC specialist and consultants: All Teachers September 2018- June 2019 o Todd Alper, to offer an ICT Institute specifically for IS 584, understanding and implementing co-teaching models. o Todd Alper & Meghan O'Toole, to offer Effective Implementation of Positive Behavioral Interventions and Supports (PBIS) from Bronx Field Support Center (BFSC). o Fran Boemio, Special Education Coaching and o Support from Bronx Field Support Center (BFSC). John Sasko & Samuel Scott, to offer Math Support from Bronx Field Support Center (BFSC) to targeted Math teachers. o Martin Wilson, to offer Math Support to targeted Math teachers from Southern Cross Consultancy. o Mark Anderson, to offer ELA Support to targeted ELA teachers from Bronx Field Support Center (BFSC). o Michelle Kunnen, to offer ELA Support to targeted ELA teachers from Southern Cross Consultancy. Jesse Mechanick, to offer Science Support from Bronx Field Support Center (BFSC). o o Aaron Lucas, to offer job embedded coaching on Differentiation and Scaffolding Techniques for Home Language Arts teacher from Bronx Field Support Center (BFSC). o Lillian Raimundi, to offer Dual Language and Transitional Bilingual Coaching, Mentoring, and Support from Bronx Field Support Center (BFSC). o Dan Vasquez, to offer Social Studies Curriculum and Planning Support from Teaching Matters. o Grace Alli, to offer Hochman Writing Coaching and Support from Bronx Field Support Center (BFSC). 8   Teachers will meet weekly to share successes and challenges with co-assessing students, co-planning, co-teaching and co-reflecting.  Teachers will be provided with support in planning to infuse technology into the instructional day to support student learning. All ICT Teachers September 2018- June 2019  Teachers will work together to plan for the implementation of integrated projects that can reinforce knowledge learned, support student collaboration and cooperation and motivate interest in learning. All ICT Teachers September 2018- June 2019  Weekly inter-visitations for new teachers (1 - 3 yrs) to visit teacher leader classrooms (lab sites) in order to see best practices in co-teaching will be scheduled. New ICT Teachers September 2018- June 2019  New teachers (1 - 3 yrs) will create an action plan for incorporating one new co-teaching strategy into their practice for each cycle.  Teachers will be identified to model best instructional strategies for implementing parallel teaching, station teaching and alternative teaching. All ICT Teachers September 2018- June 2019  In addition to addressing the professional learning needs of all teachers, special attention will be given in the plan to teachers of Dual Language classes and Transitional Bilingual classes in order to address their challenges in teaching students to become bi-literate and bi-cultural (Dual Language) or proficient in English (TBE). Dual Language and TBE teachers September 2018 - June 2019 Principal Assistant Principals ICT Teachers BFSC (Specialized Student Support Lead) Principal Assistant Principals ICT Teachers BFSC (Specialized Student Support Lead) Principal Assistant Principals ICT Teachers BFSC (Specialized Student Support Lead) Principal Assistant Principals ICT Teachers BFSC (Specialized Student Support Lead) Principal Assistant Principals Teacher Leaders 9  PD Committee Members BFSC - Director for ELLs 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. IS 584 school leadership and teachers will hold meetings/events (i.e.: Open School Night, 8th Parent meetings, ELL parent meetings, SLT, Parent Teacher Conference, etc..) to reinforce our positive school culture, understand the reason for and benefits of project based learning and share the procedures implemented and the progress of their children in integrated settings. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Identified ICT classes will be staffed with the appropriately certified general education and special education teachers. Time will be allocated daily and weekly for co-planning to ensure that co-teaching strategies are employed and are effective. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring X Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, observation data (Advance) on effective co-teaching strategies to engage all students in learning will be collected and monitored to ensure a minimum of 5% improvement in teacher effectiveness ratings for component 3C (student engagement). Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Teacher observation data in Advance will be used to assess progress. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 0  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. In year two, the administration of IS 584 has continued to establish open communication with teachers; provide ample meeting time within their programs for common planning and inquiry work (not lunch times or after school - within their daily program); and leveraging leadership. After reviewing 207-18 EOY teacher feedback surveys (submitted via Google Docs anonymously), as well as reflecting on informal conversations with department leaders in our school, it was determined that the Principal's cabinet needed more time to meet as a team to continue to develop initiatives that would positively impact the entire school community, with an emphasis on student performance and effectively meeting social emotional needs. The administration will work collaboratively with teacher leaders to build the overall capacity of all within the school, share established protocols for our school to function efficiently, and ensure all stakeholders voices are heard. 1. The 2017-2108 NYC School Quality Guide and NYC School Survey (in which all stakeholders: teachers, students and parents were surveyed) highlighted many areas of the Framework for Great Schools in which we have shown significant progress during our inaugural year. In the area of effective school leadership, our areas of strength include inclusive principal leadership and principal instructional leadership. For inclusive principal leadership we scored 95% equivalent to the city average and for principal instructional leadership we scored 87% also equivalent to the city average. PRIORITY NEED 2. The 2017-2108 NYC School Quality Guide and NYC School Survey have highlighted two areas of priority needs: teacher influence and program coherence. For teacher influence we scored 61% in comparison to the city average of 82% and in the area of program coherence we scored 70% in comparison to the city average of 83%. In order to address these two priority needs we will ensure opportunities for increased teacher voice through the effective implement of school-wide committees. We will ensure program coherence by aligning all instructional decisions, unit plan designs and professional development based on all of our data-sets and ensuring alignment and implementation to fidelity through our observation and feedback cycle; while additionally building teacher capacity. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. 1  By June 2019, there will be a 10% increase in the numbers of meetings between administrators and teacher leaders in each content area in order to engage all teachers in providing increased opportunities of ownership and improve teacher practice as captured via Advance. 2  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs,  professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  The Administration will embed weekly meetings within the daily school schedule through for the 2018 - 2019 academic school year (i.e.: grade level, content area, instructional).  Teacher leaders and administration will meet monthly to discuss the coordination of instructional units, teacher learning needs, build teacher capacity, and ensure all stakeholders voices are heard.  Teacher teams and the administration will meet to discuss student progress, analyze student work, review curriculum, and evaluate academic pacing.  The Principal's cabinet (3 AP's, 2 teacher leaders, 1 Culture & Climate Specialist) will have met once a month throughout the academic school year, to ensure alignment with school initiatives, student progress within in all content areas, and the vision of the school is followed and supported within the school.  The Principal's cabinet will calibrate academic achievement and social-emotional supports to ensure each students needs are being met.  The administration and teacher leaders will engage in instructional learning walks with a focus on implementation of strategies and procedures learned during professional learning sessions in order to provide feedback and follow-up to teachers. Teachers, Paraprofessionals, Parents & Students September 2018- June 2019  Monthly meetings with PTA cabinet to ensure that the parents' concerns are heard and a plan is made to include their voice to improve the school culture.  Monthly SLT meetings to ensure that the CEP goals are met (updated if need be). Parents September 2018 -June 2019 3 All Teachers Paraprofessionals September 2018- June 2019 Principal Assistant Principals Teacher Leaders Teacher Leaders September 2018- June 2019 Principal Assistant Principals Teacher Leaders Culture and Climate Specialist Principal Assistant Principals Teacher Leaders Principal Assistant Principals PA President  3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Starting in February 2019, the school leadership will invite parents on classroom Learning Walks (using specific protocols) with a focus on the use of structured discussion protocols, higher-order questioning techniques and the skillful use of assessment to promote improved student outcomes. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. During the month of February, a weekly schedule will be created to visit each grade band, during the school day. School leadership, lead teachers and parents will conduct learning walks and debrief about what was observed. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA C4E 21st Century Grant X SIG Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, there will have been a minimum of 5% more meetings of administrators and teacher leaders as compared to the number of those meetings during the same period in the previous year. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Meeting calendars, agenda and attendance sheets will be used to assess progress. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 4  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 1. The 2017-2108 NYC School Quality Guide and NYC School Survey (in which all stakeholders: teachers, students and parents were surveyed) highlighted many areas of the Framework for Great Schools in which we have shown significant progress during our inaugural year. In the area of strong family and community ties, our area of strength is teacher outreach to parents where we scored a combined average between teacher and students responses of 90% comparable to the city average of 92%. PRIORITY NEED 2. The 2017-2108 NYC School Quality Guide and NYC School Survey have highlighted an area of priority need: parent involvement in school where we scored 78% in comparison to the city average of 85%. In order to address this priority need we must come up with innovative ways in order to engage families n various ways to ensure an increase in parental involvement and parent voice in our school. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, there will be an increase of at least 15% more parents/caregivers actively engaged in school based activities, such as School Leadership Team, Parent Teachers Association, Back to School Nights and others, compared to the number of parents/caregivers engaged in the same activities during the 2017-18 school year. 5  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Plan Parent Teachers Assn. meetings in September 2018  during the afternoons and evenings to make it possible for working parents to attend. Send home information about the School Leadership Team and its responsibilities to request/recruit parents to become members and active participants  Advertise curriculum nights, parent workshops/informational meetings, and events with available child care on-site that focus on having parents work on curriculum based projects in order for them to understand the reasons for and the benefits of project based learning for their children.  Conduct monthly parent workshops to keep parents informed on the current Units of Study in each content-area. Parents will engage in hands-on activities that mirror how their children are being taught. Families will be provided with strategies and resources they can use at home to help their children.  Empower Parent Coordinator and SLT to host a phone bank to increase participation at school events and activities  Consistently follow-up after after each event to gauge parent satisfaction and continuous involvement  Establish a Twitter feed to advertise the positive events and activities taking place within the school community  Conduct parent survey to determine what skills they would like to learn for the purpose or organizing classes/sessions to meet their needs  IS 584 will reach out to elementary schools and to community based organizations to recruit parents and students for both the school's Dual Language and TBE programs.  The school will offer special programs for parents of interested children to motivate them to enroll their children at IS 584 based on their expressed interest, including the Saturday ENL program offered by WestHab. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Parents, PTA, SLT, CBO, staff, and all stakeholders September 2018- June 2019 Staff, parents, PTA, SLT, CBO, and all stakeholders Bilingual parents and students September 2018- June 2019 Principal Assistant principal Bilingual teachers 6   IS 584 will remain in constant communication with families via the use written (letters/memos), web based (Engrade), and phone conversations. We will communicate daily with parents on their child’s daily progress in class, attendance, homework completion, and social emotional well-being. Parents, PTA, SLT, CBO, staff, and all stakeholders September 2018- June 2019 Staff, parents, PTA, SLT, CBO, and all stakeholders  Our Parent Coordinator will serve as the our parents first point of contact (however not limited to) to assist parents with any issues/concerns they may have  Teachers will keep an updated Parent Communication Logs detailing their weekly interactions with our parents about their child's progress  West Hab will offer ENL and Zumba classes after-school and on Saturdays for parents  NY Foundling will offer Mental Health Professional Development and Family Wellness checks Parents, PTA, SLT, CBO, staff, and all stakeholders September 2018- June 2019 CBO, administration, and NY Foundling  The Assistant Community School Director will continue to function as our schools Culture and Climate Specialist collaborating with our school community to maintain a positive school environment  The Culture and Climate Specialist will continue to work Parents, PTA, SLT, CBO, staff, and all stakeholders September 2018- June 2019 Staff, parents, PTA, SLT, CBO, and all stakeholders with school staff to address and redirect any inappropriate student behaviors, mediate interactions and be in open communication with parents 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. West Hab Young Athletes Inc. New York Foundling Single Shepherd's Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Light refreshments will be provided at all events, incentives and student performances will be offered to encourage parent participation. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. 7  X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA C4E 21st Century Grant X SIG Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019 there will be an 8% increase in parent/caregiver participation in school based activities (i.e. SLT, PTA, Back to School Night, etc.) as compared to parent/caregiver participation in the same activities during the same period of time during the 2017-18 school year. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. SLT member roster, PTA member roster and activity/event attendance sheets will be used to collect data and measure progress. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 8  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) 2017 - 2018 NYSELAexam scores Reading below grade level Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) HD Word/Really Great Reading (Phonics/Decoding) Small group instruction During the school day HochmanWriting One-to one instruction Teaching to Transform (Fluency) Saturday Enhancement iReady Great Leaps (Phonic, Fluency, Comprehension) During ELT Tutoring After ELT Saturday Enhancement ELACamp (February break) Mathematics 2017 2018 NYSMath exam scores CMP3 Math (investigation) Small group instruction During the school day Khan Academy iReady One-to one instruction Saturday Enhancement DuringELT Tutoring After ELT Saturday Enhancement 9  Science Diagnostic Assessment Mid Year Assessment Social Studies Diagnostic Assessment Standards-based reteach Number Talks Corrective Instruction Action Plan PBISci(PBLInvestigations) Math Camp (Spring break) Small group instruction During the school day Integrated with literacy (Hochman& RACER writing strategies) One-to one instruction Using Technology to support investigations Saturday Enhancement DuringELT Saturday Enhancement Evidence collection Passport to SS (investigation) Small group instruction During the school day Mid Year Assessment DuringELT Saturday Enhancement Integrated with literacy (Hochman& RACER writing strategies) One-to one instruction Saturday Enhancement Using Technology to support research Citing relevant evidence 0 At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) PBIS Guidance/SBST suite rm 211 Tiered Intervention Small group and individual counseling as needed/as per IEPduring the school day MorrisHeights medical suite (on campus) rm 108 Counseling services -school based -NY Foundling -Single Shepherds -Morris Heightsclinic Psychologist (evaluation of students) 1  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) There are 52 students currently enrolled in IS 584 that are living in Temporary Housing. 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. All of the students enrolled in IS 584 receive ELT. STH students are provided with a book bag of school supplies, several pieces of the school uniform, hygiene products and counseling services when needed. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2  N/A 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. N/A 3  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. We take several measures to ensure that the staff of IS 584 is highly qualified. First, all teachers must hold a a full state certification, and demonstrate content area competency in the subject they teach. Second, to fully support our new teachers to help build their efficacy and classroom management skills, they are paired with an in house mentor. Third, we provide professional development that meets the immediate need and requests of our teachers enabling them to provide sound instruction and address the specific learning needs of our students. We will ensure that our high quality teachers remain in our school by creating a professional learning environment that is safe, respectful and challenging; by creating a school culture that values collaboration and learning, offers relevant professional development opportunities for professional growth, multiple opportunities for staff to contribute to our school community (i.e.:grade level leaders, ELL coordinator, Culture and Climate Specialist, etc...), and incentive opportunities (i.e.:awards for attendance, bulletin board awards, classroom environment awards, etc...). 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development is made available to the faculty and staff of IS 584. Our Educators come together weekly to better their practice and discuss/learn how best to improve our students outcomes. The activities and strategies are relevant, data-driven, collaborative, and differentiated. Professional Development is offered in-house, through the Department of Education BFCS, and District 7. We also encourage our staff to attend UFT workshops that will benefit them and in turn improve academic performance of our students. Some of the in-house PD offerings include: Collaborative Teaching models, Classroom management through PBIS, Understanding and Implementing iReady as a Tiered Intervention, Data Talk: Understanding student data and using student data to inform instruction, etc... Part 3: TA Schools Only 4  3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). N/A 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. The school leadership will meet with teachers regularly to assess student progress through formative and periodic assessments. At the end of each unit summative assessments will be administered; students growth will be tracked and measured. In addition, the school leadership and teachers will use the information gathered from MOSL performance assessments to drive instructional improvements throughout the school year. Teachers are also provided collaborative planning time. Each grade level meets with school leadership at least once a week to discuss at risk students, share best practices, analyze data, norm grading policies, etc... 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are 5  Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) 279,718 0 0 0 2,392,002 consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) X - - - X Column B Section Reference(s) 5A,5B,5C,5D,5E - - - 5A,5B,5C,5D,5E 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs 6   Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 7  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. I.S. 584, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students IS 584 will support parents and families of Title I students by:  providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math and use of technology;  providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and  decision making in support of the education of their children; fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress;  providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments;  sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand;  providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; 8  Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will:  actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact;  Title I Priority and Focus Schools and the parents of students served in the Title I program must jointly agree upon the use of these additional funds to support increased parent engagement/education to enable parents to effectively support their child’s learning.  engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills;  ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and  strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills;  maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability grade-level curriculum and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home;   provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report;  host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the ESSA; schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings, with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help;    Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement 9  The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by:  holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference;  hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year;  encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; supporting or hosting Family Day events;   establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents;  encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers;  providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress;  developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress;  providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between /teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) IS 584, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards;  using academic learning time efficiently;    offering high quality instruction in all content areas;  providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by:     conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education;  providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact;  0   providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information;  ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff  ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents;  notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff  member; arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities;  planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; Provide general support to parents by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents    creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents;   ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as  described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; Parent/Guardian Responsibilities II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities  monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent;  ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games;     promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits;  encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child;   participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education;  communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested;  1   become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact;  participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child;   III. Student Responsibilities Student Responsibilities:       attend school regularly and arrive on time; complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; show respect for myself, other people and property; try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; always try my best to learn. 2  Addendum: Community School Partnerships Directions: The Community School (CS) strategy is directly aligned to the Framework for Great Schools. Community Schools bring schools and community partners together and integrate academics, health, youth development, and family engagement to provide students with the tools and opportunities they need to succeed. The Core Services in Community Schools are Expanded Learning Time (ELT), Attendance Supports, Family Engagement, and Health & Wellness. Part 1 – Community School Partnerships Goal(s) How is the CS strategy integrated into academic instruction at your school, and what impact has it had on student academic outcomes? The CS strategy is integrated into the academic instruction of IS 584. Our Community School Director works to track daily student attendance, offer enrichment activities to students (Mondays and Tuesdays), provide outreach to our families, and strengthen community ties to boost students success. In addition, our CSD facilitates self-esteem, and academic success workshops twice a week. The Community School strategy has had a positive impact on our students academic outcomes. Through the on-site offerings of counseling, mental/physical health services, a variety of enrichment activities and behavioral supports our students are envelped in a positive school climate, which creates the conditions necessary to improve student learning and well-being. During the 2017 - 2018 school year overall our students showed great gains on the NYS ELA exam as well as in Indicate the summative goal(s) of the Community School for the 2018-19 school year. Be sure to construct the goal to be SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Realistic, and Time-bound. By June 2019, on a daily basis the homes of all absent students will be called to confirm the reason for the absence. In addition, all conically absent students will receive daily phone calls, a home visit from the attendance teacher and incentives to attend school; this will increase their average yearly attendance by 10% as measured by ATS. Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Community School Annual Goal(s): How will achieving your Community School Goal(s)--in Expanded Learning Time (ELT), Attendance Supports, Family Engagement, and Health & Wellness--support your academic goals for students? Students with only 90% attendance is equivalent to missing one month of school by the end of the school year. Through the use of attendance supports this will increase student achievement by being present in school. Part 2 – Community School Partnerships Core Services Action Plan Part 2a. Identify the Community-based Organization (CBO) partnerships that you will develop in ELT, Attendance Supports, Family Engagement, and Health & Wellness, their target student population(s), and scope of the services provided. As well as supporting schools’ supportive environment and attendance work, CBOs should be helping to support your school’s instructional focus. CBO Partnership West Hab Target Population 300 students 6th - 8th grade Scope of Service SY17-18 SMART Goal Attendance tracking, enrichment programs, academic interventions By June 2019, through the use of daily phone calls, a home visit from the attendance teacher and incentives to attend school; this will increase conically 3  Young Athletes NY Foundling 120 enrolled students 6th - 8th grade Sports/sportsmanship STEM enrichment Baby Think it Over program Counseling Academic academic assistance Daily crisis intervention High risk students, students actively in crisis Single Shepherds 300 students 6th - 8th grade Daily at-risk intervention absent students average yearly attendance by 10% as measured by ATS. By June 2019, all enrolled students will experience an array of fitness opportunities, academic support, and social emotional support to serve the whole child. By June 2019, will work in collaboration with the school to provide mental health support and resources to students and their families. By June 2019, the in house Single Shepard's will meet with each student assigned to them (by grade band) and conduct daily in class check ins, home visits and facilitate meditations. Part 3 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 3a. Indicate resources your Community Partnership will leverage to achieve your summative SMART goal(s) and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Financial resources via the SIG grant will be used for additional supports to IS 584, which include allocations for: an Assistant Principal- This allocation is for a supplemental 1.0 FTE Assistant Principal who will supervise the Dual Language enrichment program that supports students identified as English Language Learners meet the demands the Common Core Learning Standards. This position is aligned to our school’s SIG plan and R/SCEP Framework area Rigorous instruction. Supervisor Per Session- 1 Supervisor = 30 weeks * 4 days week * 3 hours day = 360 hours + Saturday for 4 Hours * 30 weeks = 120 hours TOTAL = 480 hours * 47.30 = $22,704. This position is aligned to our school’s SIG plan and R/SCEP Framework area Rigorous Instruction. Teacher Per Session- Teachers Professional Development and Curriculum Design = 1.5 hrs day = 1320 hours + 1320 * 45.66 = $60,271. This position is aligned to our school’s SIG plan and R/SCEP Framework area Rigorous Instruction. 4  Teaching Matters- This allocation is for a vendor(s) Teaching Matters, Inc. who will provide curriculum development and side by side coaching of teachers in the areas of Literacy, humanities and STEM. Their work will support teacher effectiveness through development and implementation of curriculum that supports Common Core standards. This position is aligned to our school’s SIG plan and R/SCEP Framework area Rigorous Instruction. Digital Age Learning- The allocation is to support the development of STEM pedagogy of select staff as well as improving the integration of technology into unit and lesson planning across the school. This allocation is for the vendor Digital Age Learning who will provide on-site coaching for approximately 22 Days * 1600 per day = 35,200. Supports will include classroom modeling and support of integrating technology in the classroom aligned to the curriculum. This allocation is aligned to our school’s SIG plan and R/SCEP Framework area Rigorous Instruction. CDW Government, LLC- This allocation is for equipment from the DOE approved vendor who will provide 102 Chromebooks * 350 each = 35,700 + 3 carts at 1500 each = $4,500 . Additional supplies as needed to support integration of this technology (Approximately $4,800). This position is aligned to our school’s SIG plan and R/SCEP Framework area Rigorous Instruction. Because this new school is still developing it's curriculum, flexibility for these funds switch to alternative technologies such as smartboards/laptops/ipads/engineering/robotics equipment as dictated by STEM curricular needs is requested. Part 3b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) Title I SWP Title III Title I TA P/F Set-aside PTA Funded X SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 3c. Describe how the school will partner with the Lead CBO to do the following: 1. Community Schools are expected to partner with a community-based partner organization (CBO) and together with members of the School Leadership Team, hire a Community School Director. The Director will lead implementation of the asset and needs assessment process, and other critically important coordinating activities. Indicate how you will leverage this aspect of the work. Community Schools are expected to personalize the needs of all students, through strategic programming and services, as determined by the asset and needs assessment, and must also offer Expanded Learning Time (ELT) and mental health programming. In completing this section, ensure that you think about how: (1) the right services are provided to the right students and families at the right time; and (2) how you will seamlessly coordinate services with instructional programming happening throughout and outside of the school day. Indicate how you will implement this work, and describe other programming you anticipate to be in place to strengthen this initiative. Community Schools are expected to emerge as Partnership Schools, which are places where parents and families feel welcome, actively participate in the conversation and decision-making around the renewal of their schools, and have many opportunities to advocate for their children. Monthly meetings and Community School Forums engaging families and community stakeholders will be a critical part of this family engagement strategy. Describe how you will implement this aspect of the work. Community School Principals are expected to meet on a weekly basis with their Community School Director, select Assistant Principals, key staff, and other CBOs, to analyze trends in data and case manage individual students. Data tools – including the New Visions Data Sorter - and training will be available for schools to use. Indicate how you will implement this aspect of the work. 2. 3. 4. IS 584 in conjunction with West Hab has hired a Community Schools Director to coordinate community and school resources. The CSD plays an integral role in our school community by attending school leadership meetings, cabinet meetings, building counsel meetings, etc.. all to the betterment of our students academic achievement. 5  Part 4 – Community School Partnerships Oversight Part 4a. Key Staff and Partners 1. Name and describe the scope of involvement of all community partners working in the school (include partners supporting ELT, counseling, enrichment, etc.) 2. Name the members of your Community School Team and how meetings will be organized and structured to engage all stakeholders and be focused on results. 3. Explain data strategies including the use of the data sorter, and steps that the school will take to ensure that the appropriate interventions are provided to the right students West Hab, through the CSD has secured ELT enrichment partnerships: Creative Connections Step in Schools The Leadership program Chess Drumline Coding Part 4b. Indicate resources needed including human resources, instructional resources, and schedule adjustments to implement the Community School program. At this time no additional resources are needed. Part 4c. Timeline for implementation and completion, including start and end dates. IS 584 is a new school entering its second school year during the 2018 - 2019 school year. The timeline for implementation and completion is September 2018 - June 2019. Part 4d. Mental Health Work Plan Separate from this S/CEP, schools will complete a Mental Health Work Plan that will become an addendum to this document. 6 Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components: 1. 2. 3. The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers. Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. 1. 2. 3. 4. High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” 1. Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences. Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. 1. These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 7  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the · · · · · · rationale subgroups and grade levels of students to be served schedule and duration language of instruction # and types of certified teachers types of materials Begin description here: Rationale: At I.S. 584, 20% of our student population is English Language Learners with a large majority of newcomers and long-term ELLs. In order to most effectively assist our newcomers to acquire basic interpersonal communication skills and help acclimate them to the United States, we will be offering a Saturday Enhancement Program. For our long-term ELLs, we would like to provide supplemental instructional support as they transition from their basic interpersonal communication skills (BICS) towards cognitive academic language proficiency (CALP), we will be offering an after-school program for extended learning opportunities. In these supplemental programs students will engage in culturally relevant project-based learning in which students will connect their learning to their culturally backgrounds while developing their listening, speaking, reading and writing skills. Subgroups & Grades: For this Title III Immigrant Supplemental Program, we are proposing to adopt two supplemental programs in order to meet the needs of both two subgroups: our newcomers and long-term ELLs. These offerings will serve newcomers and long-term ELLs in grades 6, 7 and 8. Schedule & Duration: For our Newcomer Saturday Enhancement Program will run every Saturday from September throughout June from 9:00am- 12:00pm beginning on Saturday, September 29, 2018. Our Long-Term ELL Extended Learning After-School Program will run every Wednesday, Thursday and Friday from September throughout June from 2:20pm-3:20pm beginning on Wednesday, September 12, 2018. Language of Instruction: English Number of Teachers & Certified Teachers: Our Saturday program will have 1 TESOL Certified teacher and 1 Dually Certified Science and Bilingual teacher. Our after-school program will be taught by 2 TESOL Certified teachers. Types of Materials: Four our Saturday program for newcomers, we will mostly use the Central Recommended AIR Units f Study for Newcomers in addition to teacher-created resources and materials in order to incorporate project-based learning and culturally relevant pedagogy through various texts and research opportunities. Our after-school program for long-term ELLs will mostly use Common Core Aligned Engage NY Curriculum, Attanasio's Getting Ready for the NYSESLAT and teacher-created materials in order to incorporate additional opportunities for academic language enrichment and discourse. In addition, both program may use technology-based programs created by National Geographic, Smart Science , News ELA, iReady, etc. 8 rationale teachers to receive training schedule and duration topics to be covered name of provider Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. · · · · · Begin description here: Rationale: In order to ensure that our subgroups are receiving the appropriate supports and scaffolds teachers will be provided with professional development in order to implement the curriculum for the Title III Supplemental Program. In addition, e would like to extend the professional development opportunities to all teachers in order to ensure best teaching practices when supporting English Language Learners. Teachers to Receive Training: ALL TESOL Certified and Bilingual Teachers, General Education Teachers and Special Education Teachers. Schedule and Duration: Professional Development will be offered the last Monday of every month after-school from September through June from 4:00pm-6:00pm beginning on Monday, September 24, 2018. Topics to be Covered: · · plans · · · · Scaffolds · · · · Name of the Provider: Assistant Principal- Sling C. De La Cruz November: The Four Hallmarks of Advanced Literacy&nbsp; December: The Four Hallmarks of Advanced&nbsp;Literacy&nbsp; January: The Language Progressions &amp; ELL Differentation&nbsp;&amp; Scaffolds February:&nbsp;The Language Progressions &amp; ELL Differentation&nbsp;&amp; September: EDAT&nbsp;Anaysis&nbsp;&amp; Instructional Planning for our ELLs October: BICS&nbsp;vs. CALP: Incorporating&nbsp;CALP&nbsp;into daily lesson March: NYSESLAT&nbsp;vs. ELA State Exam April:&nbsp;NYSESLAT&nbsp;vs. ELA State Exam May: Academic Language and Discourse June:&nbsp;Academic Language and Discourse Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. · · · · · Begin description here: Rationale: In order to ensure a successful school-home connection to provide the extended support to our ELLs, especially our newcomers and long-term ELLs. We will provide families rationale schedule and duration topics to be covered name of provider how parents will be notified of these activities 9  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities with opportunities to explore various parts of the city with their children and we will offer families ESL classes in order to support families' desires to learn English. Schedule & Duration: ESL classes and trips will be offered to our ELL parents weekly on Saturday's from January through June from 9:00am-12:00pm beginning Saturday, January 5, 2019. Topics to be Covered: ESL curriculum in order to enhance parents abilities to communicate with their children in English. Name of Provider: ENL Coordinator- Jennifer Reyes How Parents will be Notified: Parents will be actively recruited and signed up for the ESL class during the first few months of school September to December. We will use formal platforms such as the ELL Parent Orientation Meetings that we will have along with Open School Night. We will send flyers home with students as well as through certified mail and send ROBO calls home in order to ensure families are informed of the opportunity. Our parent coordinator and ENL coordinator will conduct one on one phone calls to every parent with a home language other than English in order to inform the of the opportunity. Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits) 1. 2. Purchased services 1. Per session Per diem High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials 2. Must be supplemental. Additional curricula, instructional materials. Must be clearly listed. 3. 4. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel N/A N/A 0 Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. N/A N/A Other TOTAL N/A N/A 1  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 07 School Name IS 584 Borough Bronx School Number 584 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Tannis Sertima Assistant Principal Sling De La Cruz Coach Coach ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Jennifer Reyes Teacher/Subject Area Miguelina Rosa Lopez Teacher/Subject Area Ana Cardona Related-Service Provider Superintendent Rafael Alvarez School Counselor Francis Solis Parent Emily Garcia Parent Coordinator Mercedelli Graciano Field Support Center Staff Member Aaron R. Lucas Other (Name and Title) C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 2 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 252 2 Total number of ELLs 53 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 21.03%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): Spanish If yes, indicate language(s): Spanish Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown Program TBE Lang. School Year Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 2017-2018 K 1 2 3 4 0 0 TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 5 0 6 1 1 7 1 1 2 8 1 1 9 0 10 11 12 Tot # 0 0 0 2 0 0 2 0 0 4 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? IS 584 uses Pearson Reading Assessments, San Diego Quick Assessments, the NYS ELA Book 2 Essay, ENIL (Estructura para Evalucion del nivel independiente de lectura), teacher made assessments are aligned to units of study, and in-house ELA simulations to collect data on how students are progressing academically. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? During the school year we have weekly meetings to discuss the student data that is being collected. On Tuesdays, all of the ENL, TBE, and DL teachers meet to analyze student data and work. The goal of this meeting is to identify successes and challenges that the ELLs are having as they are exposed to the curriculum. Collaboratively, the team identifies strategies and scaffolds that can be included into lessons and units of study in order to improve student outcomes. In the subsequent weeks 3  student data is reviewed once again in order to verify if teacher interventions have been successful in improving student achievement. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? The results of the NYSESLAT are used by teachers to identify student's strengths and weaknesses. Based on the results of the NYSITELL, NYSESLAT, interim assessments, student conferences, teacher observation and collaboration goals are established for each student according to their needs. Teachers also take into account data from the NYS ELA and Math exams to form a profile of how much progress students are making and what their academic needs are at this time. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? At the beginning of the school year, all teachers receive student achievement data from the previous school year and make guided groups in each of the content areas. Students receive differentiated instruction n all content areas and as teachers deliver lessons they collect formative data (exit tickets, quizzes, reflections, etc.) on student performance to inform their future instruction. ELLs that are struggling academically in any of the content area received intensive intervention in small groups. Students that do not make progress are referred to the Response to Intervention (RTI) team. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] Students that are not making sufficient progress are referred by a staff memeber to the Response to Intervention (RTI) team for support. At this meeting student data and work samples are reviewed and discussed. The RTI team develops an action plan for the student which often includes social-emotional support from the social worker and at-risk academic intervention with an IEP teacher in small groups and/or in an one to one setting. In 6-8 weeks, the RTI team reconvenes to monitor student progress and determines next steps for the student which can include, but not limited to, a continuation of at-risk services. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. Several data points are used to evaluate and inform our ELL program such as the New York State ELA and Math exam results and the NYSESLAT. According to the ELL Data Analysis Tool, ELLs in our school struggled with the writing portion of the NYSESLAT. In contrast, students generally performed well with the speaking portion of the exam. Teachers have used this data to incorporate more scaffolds and strategies for improving writing outcomes by using the suggestions found in the New Language Arts Progressions. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? The instructional cabinet reviews NYSESLAT, NYSITELL, and student endline assessments. The Assistant principal attended the EDAT training offered by the Division of English Language Learners and Student Support in the past and turnkeyed findings to all teachers of English Language Learners. Teachers reviewed the EDAT data to identify at-risk students and reviewed the NYSESLAT, NYSITELL, NYS Math, NYS ELA and attendance data and consequently, the appropriate interventions are put in place by teachers. Each teacher has been provided with binder with ELL assessment data to use in instructional planning and to use when discussing student achievement with parents and administrators. One on student conferences are also held. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). 4  a. Freestanding ENL program. English Language Learners are grouped in 1-2 classes per grade in monolingual classes based on their proficiency level. Entering and Emerging students are pulled out of their classes by a certified ENL teacher for 180 minutes a week for Stand Alone ENL in small groups composed of students with similar ability levels. Entering, Emerging, Transitioning, and Expanding ELLs receive integrated ENL instruction in their classrooms with two co-teachers (one certified ENL teacher and one certified content area teacher) for 180 minutes (4 periods). Teachers co-plan integrated ENL lessons using the school developed ELA curriculum which uses resources from TCRWP. ENL teachers identify and plan the language and content objectives for lessons and units of study. b. TBE program. If applicable. We offer a Transitional Bilingual Education in grades 6,7, and 8. The initial language allocation is 60% Spanish and 40% English. Students are grouped in the classes heterogeneously. Certified ESOL teachers teach Stand Alone ENL four periods a week using materials such as AIR unit and a modified version of the ELA unit that includes ELL supports and scaffolds. Teachers in the TBE program modify the ELA curriculum by using ESL/ENL methodologies to support student access to the content and skills taught through ELA. Furthermore, students also received four periods (180 minutes) of Home Language Arts in Spanish, which mirrors the ELA curriculum so students are able to transfer the content and skills when they engage in ELA lessons. The TBE program also offers Science and Social Studies in Spanish and each content area is offered a minimum of four times a week for 180 minutes. c. DL program. If applicable. For the 2017-2018 school year we opened a Dual Language program in 6th grade and have continued it for the 2018-2019 school year. Students are programmed in a self-contained class. Students receive Stand Alone ENL for 180 minutes and integrated ENL for 180 minutes provided by two certified ENL teachers. Students also receive four periods (180 minutes) of Home Language Arts to ensure a strong literacy foundation in Spanish. In order to ensure that 50% of the DL program is delivered in Spanish, three content areas- Math, Science, and Social Studies are delivered in English or Spanish depending on the language of the day. Each content area is offered for a minimum of 180 minutes by a certified content area teacher. 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? ENL teacher schedules are developed collaboratively between the Assistant Principal for English Language Learners, Principal and support staff from the Bronx Field Support Center. The RLAT from ATS is used to identify student proficiency levels from the Spring administration of the NYSESLAT or the NYSITELL (if applicable). Each ENL teacher is assigned specific classes and/or grade bands by the principal. The ENL and TBE (K-8) units of study table is cross-referenced to ensure ELL students who receive the appropriate number of Stand Alone ENL, integrated ENL, and Home Language Arts. Periodic walk throughs are scheduled by administration to ensure daily instruction is aligned to schedules. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. Teachers of English Language Learners in all program models uses ENL methodologies such as visuals, animated videos with captions, sentence frames, graphic organizers, modified texts, drawings, bilingual glossaries, and cooperative learning. Lessons across content areas and languages of instruction include a language objective. The crafting of language objectives allows teachers to consider what language will be necessary for students to know thoroughly and understand the content of the lessons. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? English Language Learners are appropriately evaluated in their native language using ENIL (Estructura para La Evaluacion del nival Independiente de lectura) which is a Spanish reading assessment as well as utilizing our curriculum embedded assessments that are in the home language. Data from the aforementioned assessments are reviewed by teachers and the administrative team periodically to ensure academic progress in the home language. 5  5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status a. The instructional plan in place for SIFE students is to offer one-on-one services, small group instruction, as well as, helping them assimilate to the school and classroom environments. Teachers carefully analyze data from the SIFE screener as well as the results from the NYSESLAT/NYSITELL to identify the students. Teachers incorporate culturally relevant materials to activate students' prior knowledge (turn-talking, behavorial norms) for studnets with minimal formal education. b. For newcomers, teachers refer to the students' NYSITELL data to identify areas of needs and target a specific language modality that the student needs the most support in. Teachers refer to New Language Arts Progression for guidance on the most effective practices in teacher newcomers. Teachers plan lessons that include pre taught vocabulary, visuals, and graphic organizers to support their receptive and productive language abilities. In writing lessons, teachers model how to use technology such as listening centers and websites to assist students in acquiring general and domain-specific vocabulary. In addition, teachers for newcomers use intense reading intervention programs to support phonic awareness and vocabulary development. Students receive intensive teacher-led support in small group instruction and native language support when necessary. Students are also "buddied" up with students who have been in the US school system for longer time in order to become better acclimated to the expectations of the school. c. Teachers refer to the students' most recent NYSESLAT, NYS ELA, Math, school based and classroom based assessments to determine the students' language and content abilities. Teachers provide the students with copious models and examples, sentence starters, and engage students in peer to peer collaboration when producing projects based on the ELA curriculum which are aligned to science and social studies. Teachers occasionally provide native language support to developing students, which is a suggestion from the New Language Arts Progression. Students also participate in the schoolwide RTI program which is an intensive small group instruction. d. Long term ELLs receive additional support each day during Extended Learning time, to support students with reading and writing skills since a review of NYSESLAT data show that these are the modalities that long term ELLs at IS 584 struggle with the most. e. Formers ELLs receive their 90 minutes of integrated ENL with a certified ENL teacher and a classroom teacher in which students receive small group instruction. Student performance data such as Pearson reading data and San Diego Quick assessment data are carefully monitored and if students need additional support they are scheduled for at-risk instruction in small groups with an ENL teacher. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? Teachers are given access and/or provided with an ELL-SWDs, IEP and implement instruction based not only the academic neds of the ELL-SWD student but also their emotional needs. ELLs with IEPs are given manipulatives when possible and are presented information in multiple formats. Students are read aloud to, are instructed in guided groups when possible shown visuals extensively. Teachers use these strategies to build schema before introducing a new topic discussion to ensure ELL-SWDs are afforded equal access to the curriculum. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? All efforts are made to get to know the needs of our ELL-SWDs and to craft lessons and units to address their needs. This has meant changing the configuration of classroom environments (i.e., furniture and seating arrangement) when necessary to facilitate having a comfortable environment for the students. Instructionally, this has meant creating various representations of texts and assignments to ensure IEP goals are measured using appropriate materials. 6  8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. In addition to the targeted instruction provided through our differentiated instruction within the core program, our school uses the Response to Intervention model to provide targeted intervention to students identified as at-risk using universal screenings which are administered at least three times of the year. The range of intervention services are as follows: - Small group instruction in reading (English-Spanish) - Small group instruction in writing (English-Spanish) -Small group instruction in math ( English- Spanish) - Extended learning (English- Spanish) - School vacation math and ELA camp (English) - Saturday Enhancement Program (English) - ENL Saturday Program (English) 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? We are expanding the Dual Language program to grade 7 during the 2018-2019 school year and to grade 8 during the 2019-2020 school year. The programs expansion is based on interest that has been expressed from various stakeholders in the community since the opening of the Dual Langauge Program in 6th grade. We continue to monitor responses from the parent survey and selecion form as well as entries from the ELPC screen on ATS periodically and elicit from parents during our school community meetings and events. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? N/A 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. ELLs are afforded equal access to all school programs. These include: academic after school programs, Saturday academies and vacation programs. The programs focus on literacy, math, and vocabulary development. Invitations to these programs are sent in English and in the preferred language of the students parents. These programs not only provide students with oppo 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. The instructional materials used to support ELLs are laptops, iReady, Myon, and Google Classroom for students to complete homework, projects, and to communicate with teachers. . The following web-based programs. Other instructional materials include SmarBoard interactive activities and teacher created materials. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? In the TBE, DL, and ENL programs home language support is assessed through the use of formative assessments. In the DL and TBE programs, home language support is also assessed through the ENIL Spanish reading assessment outcomes, Spanish LAB results, and teacher crafted assessments for units of study. Based on the data, a HLA teacher provides explicit language instruction to small groups and the entire class if necessary. In addition to HLA, home language supports are provided across content areas. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. All materials utilized in our school are research based and include NYS common core/ ESL /ELL curricular in all grade levels that support our ELL student needs. New materials are reviewed by the classroom teacher to ensure alignment to the CCLS and all final purchase orders of services and resources are reviewed by an administrator to ensure the quality and alignmnent of the resources to the curriculum and student needs. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? 7  16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). During the middle school application period the school offers tours to the families of interested students. The tour includes an overview from the administration of the three different ELL programs that are offered at our school. In the late spring/ early summer accepted students are invited to an orientation where they receive more in depth information about the school and our program offerings. During this orientation students and parents get to meet the administrative team, the parent coordinator, and teachers including TBE,DL, and ENL teachers. During the school year, new ELLs are placed in a Extended Learning Time (Period 9)course where they are supported academically and socio-emotionally from two teachers. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? Language electives are not offered at this time to ELLs. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? a. Instruction follows a Dual Language roller coaster model. b. For the 2018-2019 school year Math, Science, and Social Studies will be taught in Spanish or English depending on the language of the day and English Language Arts, Physical Education, Health, and Music will be taught in English. c. Language is separated by teacher d. Literacy for English and Spanish are taught simultaneously. Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? Professional development is offered for all ELL personnel at the school in supporting ELLs as they engage in the CCLS. The professional development for the school year includes: co-teaching in the Integrated ENL classroom, developing aligned content and language objectives, and planning differentiated lessons for ELLs. During Tuesday meetings, the ELL coordinator has presented professional learning opportunities on analyzing ELL data, differentiation, and lesson planning. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. In order to meet the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2, our administrative team and ELL coordinator share professional development offered by the Division of English Language Learners and Support as well as the Bronx Field Support Center. After participating in professional developments, teachers are required to articulate with the principal and/or assistant principals key take aways from the professional development activity and how they can be implemented in their lessons and units. Copies of agendas and attendance from professional development sessions are kept in a central location by administration. 8  Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? This year all parents of English Language Learners were invited to a special conference to have their annual meeting as required by CR Part 154.2. Additionally, for Parent Engagement on Tuesdays invitations are sent home with students in English and in the child's home language to schedule an appointment with parents to discuss the goals of the ELL program that the child is enrolled in as well as the child's linguistic strengths and needs. The child's ENL, TBE,or DL teacher facilitates the meeting in order to give a complete view of the child's academic and linguistic needs and use NYSESLAT/ NYSITELL and other assessment data to guide the conversation between the parents the teachers. The parents are also provided with data reports of the child's progress and information on the rights of English Language Learners along with practical ways in which parents can help their children at home. . Going forward, parents who are unable to attend on Tuesdays will be scheduled for over the phone meetings (using Over the Phone Interpretation when necessary). 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. During the course of the school year, parents are invited to the following activities: - curriculum night Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. 9 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Tannis Sertima , testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 0  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: I.S. 584 School DBN: 07X584 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Tannis Sertima Title Principal Sling C. De La Cruz Assistant Principal Mercedelli Graciano Parent Coordinator Jennifer Reyes ENL/Bilingual Teacher Parent Ana Cardona Teacher/Subject Area Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach Francis Solis School Counselor Rafael Alvarez Aaron R. Lucas Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member ELL Coach, Instructional and Technical Support Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 07X584 School Name: I.S. 584 Superintendent: Cintron The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Mercecilli Graciano Parent Coordinator Yes Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. The data from the following documents are used to assess language preferences of the parents for both written and oral communication: * Student Registration Form - Completed by the school or enrollment office during the point of initial admissions. * Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS) - Completed by all parents during the point of initial enrollment. * Emergency Contact (Blue Card) - Completed by all parents at the beginning of every school year, upon enrollment in a new school, and updated as needed. The following ATS reports are also used to generate the Parents' Preferred Language Reports: 2  * School Level Emergency Contact Form (RCPL) * School Level Emergency Contact Student List (RCON) * School Level Adult Preferred Language report (RAPL) * School Level Adult Detail Report (RADL) Throughout the school year, the Language Access Coordinator (LAC) will regularly generate and review 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral 0 4 1 1 327 171 2 0 Bengali French Fulani Ndebele English Spanish Soninke American SIgn Language 0 0.79 0.2 0.2 64.62 33.79 0.4 0 1 4 1 1 323 173 2 1 0.2 0.79 0.2 0.2 63.83 34.19 0.4 0.2 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. N/A Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 3  1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families Parent Handbook September Calendar/Events September -June PTA flyers monthly Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. All written communication is written in English and translated in parents' preferred languages. Written translation in Spanish is mostly provided in-house by staff members whose native language is Spanish. In situation where there is no available to translate in parents preferred languages, the school will contact the DOE Translation and Interpretation Unit or DOE vendor. Translation is done at least two weeks before the written communication is sent to parents to accommodate time for review and revision. For further questions and explanations about the written communication, parents are invited to call or come to the school where Language Line will be used to communicate in the parents preferred language. All written communication is written in English and translated in parents' preferred languages. Written translation in Spanish is mostly provided in-house by staff members whose native language is Spanish. In situation where there is no available to translate in parents preferred languages, the school will contact the DOE Translation and Interpretation Unit or DOE vendor. Translation is done at least two weeks before the written communication is sent to parents to accommodate time for review and revision. For further questions and explanations about the written communication, parents are invited to call or come to the school where Language Line will be used to communicate in the parents preferred language. All written communication is written in English and translated in parents' preferred languages. Written 4  workshops September- June translation in Spanish is mostly provided in-house by staff members whose native language is Spanish. In situation where there is no available to translate in parents preferred languages, the school will contact the DOE Translation and Interpretation Unit or DOE vendor. Translation is done at least two weeks before the written communication is sent to parents to accommodate time for review and revision. For further questions and explanations about the written communication, parents are invited to call or come to the school where Language Line will be used to communicate in the parents preferred language. All written communication is written in English and translated in parents' preferred languages. Written translation in Spanish is mostly provided in-house by staff members whose native language is Spanish. In situation where there is no available to translate in parents preferred languages, the school will contact the DOE Translation and Interpretation Unit or DOE vendor. Translation is done at least two weeks before the written communication is sent to parents to accommodate time for review and revision. For further questions and explanations about the written communication, parents are invited to call or come to the school where Language Line will be used to communicate in the parents preferred language. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide Parent Teacher Night November, March, May interpretation service(s)? Interpretation services will be provided by in-house staff members who are proficient in the parents preferred language. Interpretation services that 5  PTA Meetings monthly IEP Meeting ongoing Tuesday Parent Engagement Tuesday cannot be accommodated by a staff member will be provided through over-the-phone interpreters via Language Line or an in-person interpreter through a DOE vendor. Interpretation services will be provided by in-house staff members who are proficient in the parents preferred language. Interpretation services that cannot be accommodated by a staff member will be provided through over-the-phone interpreters via Language Line or an in-person interpreter through a DOE vendor. Interpretation services will be provided by in-house staff members who are proficient in the parents preferred language. Interpretation services that cannot be accommodated by a staff member will be provided through over-the-phone interpreters via Language Line or an in-person interpreter through a DOE vendor. Interpretation services will be is provided by in-house staff members who are proficient in the parents preferred language. Interpretation services that cannot be accommodated by a staff member will be provided through over-the-phone interpreters via Language Line or an in-person interpreter through a DOE vendor. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. All classrooms, lunchroom, main office, etc have an emergency folder with a roster and parents preferred language. Staff has been made aware to use Language Line to communicate with families in their preferred language. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. 6  The following documents will be given to staff members to meet the compliance. a. Chancellor's Regulation A-663 b. Bill of Parent Rights and Responsibilities which includes their rights regarding translation and interpretation services c. Distribute the Language Identification Guide to office staff and train them in using the guide to help determine the language spoken by a parent. d. Distribute Language Line information to all staff members including safety agents and remind them of the steps on how to obtain an interpreter for LEP visitors to the school. Internal letter will be sent out to all school staff at least three times a year reminding them of their responsibility to communicate with LEP parents and what resources are available to them to do so. The school's Language Access Coordinator (LAC) will provide a language access training to all staff members including office staff and medical team along side with the support of the Field Language Access Coordinator (FLAC) Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) - Ensure that the welcome poster is posted at the primary entrance of the school. - Post signs regarding visitor access in covered languages to ensure that parents are not prevented from reaching the office due to language barriers. - Provide all parents with a copy of the Parents' Bill of Rights and Responsibilities. It includes their rights regarding translation and interpretation services. - Provide all parents with a copy of the Expect Success Guide. It outlines language services provided by the DOE. - To facilitate the translation of documents in covered or non-covered languages, the school will use funding for translation and interpretation - To pay DOE contracted vendor and/or multilingual staff members per session to provide translation and Interpretation. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? 7  We will provide parents a survey in Spanish to fill out requesting feedback on our language access services. For all other languages school staff will use Language Line to verbally gather feedback by reading the survey to the the families. 8 
