2018-19 COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (CEP-CS) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 09X594 School Name: M.S. 594 Principal: LYNE JAMES TURNBULL 2018-19 CEP-CS 1  Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC)   School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information New Pathways Academy 09X594 School Number (DBN): n/a 6-8 1000 Teller Avenue, Bronx, NY 10456 (718) 588-8349 Phone Number: (718) 588-8263 Fax: LyneJames Turnbull Ljamesturnbull@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Lyne Turnbull TBD Linda Martin Email Address: Parents’ Association President: Anastasia Marouani SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Patrice Myrick n/a n/a Anastasia Marouani District Information Geographical District: 9 Superintendent’s Office Address: Leticia Rosario Superintendent: 1245 Washington Avenue, Bronx, NY 10456 Lrosario2@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 7185797140 Phone Number: 7184107017 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC)   FSC: Bronx Executive Director’s Office Address: Jose Ruiz Executive Director: 1230 ZeregaAvenue Bronx NY JRuiz2@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 7188287776 Phone Number: na Fax:   Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) LyneTurnbull Ricardo Camacho Linda Martin SholaHines Patrice Myrick Oseas Andujar AlondraSicardo Anastasia Marouani Eugene Gyekye Sparkle Ragland Jennifer Cruz *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable/ Member/ Teacher Member/ Teacher Member/ Parent   Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Marina Martinez Nancy Rodriguez Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/   Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with   the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement   Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? New Pathways Academy strives to develop internationally minded scholars with active and creative minds, a sense of understanding and compassion for one another, and the courage to act in our “PATH” (Perseverance, Accountability, Thoughtfulness, Honesty). We stress the development of exemplary citizenship: intellectual, social, emotional and physical.   2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. Since we are a small school, we are able to provide a personalized learning environment that supports all students by providing one-on-one classroom instruction and a strong advisory program. This is especially important for our ELL and IEP students. Every child is known well by at least one adult in the school. This relationship enables teachers to keep students on track towards academic and social development goals. In addition, we take advantage of our small school setting to embed small group work providing numerous opportunities for all students including students with Individualized Educational Plans and English Language Learners to teach one another and to share knowledge through daily instruction and enrichment opportunities. We accommodate all IEP students' learning based upon their IEPs while maintaining the same rigorous academic standards that all students are held to. New Pathways Academy is grounded in the belief that every student can achieve educational and life success if the highest expectations are held for students, and if the school staff, parents, faculty, and all members of the school community embody the same shared values and expectations. New Pathways Academy strives to become a world-class community of enthusiastic life-long learners who are motivated by the pursuit of academic excellence allied with social responsibility. Our core values, Perseverance, Accountability, Thoughtfulness, and Honesty, form the PATH that we strive to accomplish within the supportive environment of the “Framework for Great Schools”. These four character themes pervade all aspects of our school environment and school life. The themes inform our instructional, professional development, operational and management decisions. Coupled with rigorous instruction, our school’s success can be attributed to the strong culture of a supportive environment for learning that we have created at New Pathways Academy. NPA partners with Montefiore Health Clinic and Astor Mental Health Center. These two health providers service our student body by providing medical health - (medical doctor/registered nurse on site) and mental health - (two full time Social Workers on site). Montefiore supplements their services with periodic lessons around hygiene, sexual education, inter-personal relationship building, and nutrition. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. Our diverse student population is made up of 198 students in grades 6-8. This population includes 35% English Language Learners and 14% IEP students. These students require additional supports and resources that are seamlessly integrated into the school's instructional program in order to assist them in developing not only academically but socially and emotionally. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. N/A; We are a new school. Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment 0  Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. We noticed that we have 90% of students who scored at either a 1 or 2 on the Math state exam during the previous school year, in addition to 87% of students who scored a 1 or 2 on the ELA state exam. Our students' academic data for the previous school year revealed that our students are weakest in ELA. We are working with Generation Ready Consultancy to address this. Using Generation Ready’s Academic Classroom Observation Continuum, the consultant has been conducting baseline observations of teachers’ practices in seven English classrooms, two Social Studies classrooms and two Science classrooms to get a first hand view of teachers' practices and provide additional support to teachers in instructional design and planning. The goal this year is hone teachers abilities across grade levels to support effective lesson planning including designing formative and summative assessments to guide student progress. Our needs assessment is a school-wide initiative regarding school-wide consistency about learning outcomes for all students, time in the classroom, students grouping, and the academic rigor and relevance of instruction. Specifically, we discuss how to sustain our routines, instructional practices, and learning environment to meet grade-level expectations in all subjects for all students. We will continue our dialogue regarding the quality of instructional time and how to maximize it through consistent and efficient structures for class openings, homework collection, within class transitions and formative assessment. Because we have a large population of students to whom English is a second language and other struggling readers, we provide ESL Pull-Out service to support the needs of ELL students. Our Instructional teams include 1) Instructional Cabinet comprising of the Principal, Lead Teacher, ESL Teacher, IEP Teacher, AVID Coordinator and SPED Liaison. They each also represent a member from a grade team. 2) Grade Teams 3) Core Teams - English, Math, SS, Science, ESL and SPED teams. 4) AVID Team: This team plans weekly advisory lessons. 17 of 19 of our teachers are brand new to teaching, one is a teacher from out of state and one is a veteran NYC teacher. This data point is the foundation for our priority statement that addresses our action of theory which states: "If we implement professional development that helps teachers to build capacity for effective classroom engagement, then we will be able to positively impact academic proficiency for all students". We recognize a need for a curriculum / common planning team. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. NPA instructional teams will integrate literacy based instruction and assessment practices across content areas to improve student proficiency in ELA by an overall 5% from the current 8% to 13% and student proficiency in Math by an overall 5%, from the current 9% to 14% proficient by June, 2019. 1  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Teachers will participate in bi-weekly professional development sessions that are focused on developing crucial skills that will directly build their capacity to respond to the needs of students, specifically with respect to utilizing best practices with regards to teaching literacy. Pedagogues Sept. 2018 - June 2019 Teachers will be provided with curricular materials that are aligned across the school, and focus on addressing literacy and mathematics academic achievement. Pedagogues Sept. 2018 - June 2019 Teachers will meet for weekly departmental meetings in order to review school-wide data, share best practices, and develop strategies to address literacy and mathematics gaps. Pedagogues Sept. 2018 - June 2019 Bi-monthly grade team meetings will meet in order for teachers to review assessment results and determine next steps in addressing gaps in student understanding across the grade. Pedagogues Sept. 2018 - June 2019 Generation Ready consultants, Principal, Lead Teacher, and teacher leaders. Principal, lead teacher, community schools director Principal, lead teacher, Department teams Principal, lead teacher, Grade teams 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. PA meetings will be conducted regularly in order to provide parents with insight into the types of events going on in the school related to assessment and literacy practices. Furthermore, our staff will communicate with families through our online grade book, Jupiter Grades, which will allow parents to see their child's progress as they work towards improving their literacy and mathematics knowledge bases. Lastly, the guidance counselor will be sending home promotion in doubt letters to parents of students who are at risk for not being promoted to the next grade. This letter will also include next steps that the school will be taking to ensure that their child is able to be promoted. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. All staff will be assigned core teams for inquiry and collaborative work with colleagues. Generation Ready Consultants will have eight to ten staff assigned to each of them for on-going professional development support. Lead Teacher will mentor all new teachers to meet mentoring requirements. All PD activities will be scheduled during the school session. Adjustments will be made to teacher schedules to allow in-house non-paid workshops. All professional 2  development activities will be supported by title 1 and tax levy funds. Teachers will be selected to attend AVID - Advancement Via Individual Determination professional development programs. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 1.Grade teams will review subgroup data after each periodic assessment. We will monitor students readiness for State Exams three times per year and analyze this data to inform instructional adjustments and to identify students in need of interventions. Our mid-year check point will occur in February after readiness exam #2. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) Teacher created Readiness Exams in Math and ELA. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 3  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? We noticed that our school's students had a combined attendance rate of 77% during the 2017-18 school year. As a result of this number, students were, on average, missing almost a quarter of the school year of instructional time. Therefore, addressing the low attendance percentages is crucial to the success of our students. Specifically, our school has put in the following measures as interventions; 1. Collecting lateness and absences data through late pass sign in and attendance register. 2. Daily parent notifications via phone calls to parents about absences and lateness of their children. 3. Providing monthly incentive packages (individually and in grade teams) for students meeting 95% attendance benchmark. 4. Chronically and severely chronically absent students set goals with the school's attendance monitoring team. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June, 2019, we will effectively implement attendance interventions and support strategies which will result in an overall 13% increase in average student attendance from 77% in 17-18 to 90%. 4  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? We will meet weekly as a School Support Team to review attendance data, as well as behavioral concerns from staff members, for our students. Students Sept. 2018 - June 2019 We will engage in individualized attendance and behavioral interventions with students based on data from our school's attendance "heat map" and based on our electronic referral system via google form, which teachers fill out on a weekly basis. Students Sept. 2018 - June 2019 We will provide students with advisory classes at least two times a week (for 8th grade) and three times a week (for 6th and 7th grade) in order to assist students' social-emotional development. This will also include teaching students crucial skills through the AVID program. Students Sept. 2018 - June 2019 We will install Positive Behavioral Interventions and Support strategies that encourage positive student behaviors through positive reinforcement. Students Sept. 2018- June 2019 Principal, lead teacher, parent coordinator, community school director, guidance counselor, and pedagogue. Principal, lead teacher, parent coordinator, community schools director, guidance counselor, and pedagogue. Advisory team, advisory teachers, principal, lead teacher, community schools director, AVID team. PBIS team, principal, lead teacher, community schools director. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Phone master is set up to contact parents of students who are coming in late to school, or if their child is not in attendance. Those parents whose children are routinely late or chronically absent will also be visited by our school's attendance teacher to follow up on those patterns of concern. We will also make phone calls to parents in order to reinforce positive behaviors in students, as well as sharing areas of concern for students who are struggling with behavior. Students with repetitive behavioral challenges will be offered at-risk counseling for a six-week period to assist student in developing effective behavioral management skills. In-person conferences will also be held with 5  parents in order to work collaboratively in the development of behavioral interventions. The conferences will be facilitated by the Principal, Operations Manager, School Counselor and student's teacher. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. The principal, Literacy Coach, and the lead teacher will lead data analysis. Teacher mentors, based on Generation ready recommendation, will support the writing of a re-teach lesson plan. Writing is a challenge for several of our students based on their performance on the short response section of the periodic assessments. We would like to use AVID's writing strategies as an instructional tool to improve our students’ writing skills. In addition, we will focus on domain 3C of Danielson's Framework as an assessment for teachers to engage students in learning through writing that requires students thinking. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. In February, 2019, we will analyze attendance trends over the first time by subgroup with a mid-year goal of 87% by February 1, 2019. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. ATS data, STARS Attendance data, and New Visions Heat Map attendance data. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 6  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. We noticed that our school's demographics includes 14% of our student population having IEPs, and 35% of our students are classified as ELLs. Given the large number of these students who require additional supports and resources within our school, we want to focus on ensuring that we increase proficiency for these target student populations. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June, 2019 teacher teams will analyze student performance data on periodic assessments and iReady assessments to develop targeted supports for SWDS and ENLS with a goal of increasing their proficiency on the Math and ELA state exams by 5% from 1% to 6% average across exams. 7  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Teachers will work during department meetings and grade team meetings to analyze student data from periodic assessments and from i-Ready assessments in order to inform and adjust instruction based upon data trends. Students Sept. 2018- June 2019 Department teams, grade teams, principal, lead teacher, community schools director We will implement a curriculum for ELL students who are pulled out of classes that is meant to support their growth and comprehension in not only English, but in their native language as well. We will review IEPs within the Special Education team, and with grade teams, to ensure that all staff members are aware of student needs based upon the information identified in the IEPs. We will create an "IEP at-a-peek" form that will allow general education teachers to quickly identify needs of individual students. ELL Students Sept. 2018- ENL Teachers June 2019 IEP Students Sept. 2018- June 2019 Special education teachers, general education teachers n/a 3b – Parent and Family Engagement na na na How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Parents are invited to come in to meet with the IEP team during their child's annual review. They are an integral part of the IEP generation process, and are able to speak to what types of supports and resources they believe can be most beneficial to their child in an academic setting. Parents of ELL students are sent entitlement letters, and are walked through the intake process by a pedagogue that is able to share with them the types of opportunities that our school offers, so that they are able to make the most informed decision possible regarding their child's ELL placement. In addition, parents will stay informed of their child's progress, attendance and grades by means of the Jupiter Ed system. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 8  Generation Ready Consultants, Mentors, and Lead Teacher; Parent Engagement hours every Tuesday. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. We will use our periodic assessments to measure student growth throughout the year because they are aligned fully to the state exam. We will conduct these exams twice a year to provide progress monitoring. We will be 25% toward our goal in November and 75% toward our goal in February. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. We will use a data analysis tool called i-Ready to measure student mastery of standards and use the conversion chart from the state exam to discover student levels. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 9  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Of our pedagogical staff, we currently have 16 brand new teachers to the teaching profession. As a result, we must be able to build the professional capacity and encourage growth for all teachers by providing a diverse range of professional learning opportunities. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June, 2019, the school leadership team will plan and implement professional learning opportunities that increase opportunities for student engagement across classrooms and grade level with a goal of 75% of teachers receiving an overall MOTP rating of Effective. 0  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? We will offer bi-weekly PD sessions that target a variety of Danielson Framework components that are integral to the growth and development of new teachers (including 1E -- planning and preparation and 3C -- student engagement). Each new teacher will be assigned a teacher mentor in the school who has at least five years of teaching experience, and is able to share best practices and instructional strategies with them that can positively impact their development as educators. We will form collaborative partnerships with our sister school (Mott Hall Science and Technology Academy) in order to give new teachers opportunities to learn from peers in the field who have a wealth of professional knowledge to share. Pedagogues Sept. 2018- June 2019 All new teachers Sept. 2018- June 2019 New teachers Sept. 2018- June 2019 Generation Ready Consultants, lead teacher, principal Teacher mentors, lead teacher, principal Sister school partnerships, principal, lead teacher n/a 3b – Parent and Family Engagement n/a n/a n/a How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Families will get an opportunity to meet with teachers and staff members during two annual parent teacher conferences. This forum will provide families with an opportunity to review grades and meet with their child's teacher in order to discuss academic concerns that they may have. the school has instituted a student governance system to ensure that the voice of students are heard in decision making. The student president in addition to one member of the student council will be members of the School Leadership Team. Furthermore, parents will have access to Jupiter Grades and will be able to communicate with teachers regarding their child's progress and the types of instructional opportunities available. Parents will also be encouraged to participate in PTA meetings where they can take on leadership roles and share innovative ideas to support our students and improve the school community. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. All members of our school community will be involved in implementing our strategies in this area. We will use our AVID resources for our advisory. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. 1  X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. We review our OORS report monthly to assess need areas. We also review the number of disciplinary referrals monthly and follow up as needed. We conduct case studies on students who struggle with discipline and we provide outreach to parents. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Student Referral data as well as comparing our OORS report to other middles schools that are similar to ours. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. We’ve collected preliminary information about our families’ needs, wants and expectations through a needs assessment survey, which will provide a larger context for the rest of our targeted school-wide data: attendance data, i-ready diagnostic scores, state exams, assessment data, etc. This in-depth analysis in addition to a strong collaboration with the Parent Association and Community School Team will allow us to engage in continuous data examination and feedback collection via regular focus groups. Our challenge is to engage families in school decision making so that they reinforce school expectations with their children at home, which will allow students to receive well-rounded support from diverse stakeholders.This level of family engagement will help us build a culture of trust and investment that will enhance students’ academic and personal growth. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June, 2019, we will create unique opportunities for parents to engage in the school community to positively impact students' social and emotional status and to enhance the home-school partnership as evidenced by 75% positive responses regarding questions included in the Parent Involvement section of the Framework for Great Schools Report. 3  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Parent workshop on a variety of topics, such as: support in accessing student achievement and attendance information on "Jupiter Grades"; support on the high school application and articulation process; healthy routines for school success; tips for preparing for state exams, and more. Parents & Students Sept. 2018 - June 2019 Generation Ready Consultants, Guidance Counselor, Attendance Teacher, Community School Director All At-Risk Students Sept. 2018 - June 2019 IEP Teachers and ELL Teachers. We will accommodate IEP students’ learning based on the IEP and their Behavioral Intervention Plan. For our ELL students, we will personalize their learning using Milestone, a research based program that focuses their learning on the English Language Proficiency status Parent Survey; Focus groups; Parent Association meetings; Community School Team Meetings; Invitation to all school activities Parents Sept. 2018 - June 2019 Tech Specialist, Parent Coordinator, Community School Director Parent Coordinator Establishment of an active Parent Newsletter for open communication Parents Sept. 2018 - June 2019 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. We utilize our CBOs such as Center for Supportive Schools, which supports our community school strategy, as well as Leap, which provides our after school programming. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. All key personnel--the instructional leadership team identified above will be involved in implementing our strategies in this area. The school leadership team and community school director are willing to donate from their respective allocations to buy needed supplies. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy Title I SWP Title I TA Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant 4  C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February, 2019 we will have 80% of students & parents registered for Jupiter grades updates, and they will be logging in at least once per week to monitor their student's progress. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Jupiter grades usage and login reports. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 5  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Mathematics Science Social Studies At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Periodic Assessment Data, NYS Common Core Assessment data; Attendance data, Case Study data Periodic Assessment Data, NYS Common Core Assessment data; Attendance data, Case Study data Periodic Assessment Data, NYS Common Core Assessment data; Attendance data, Case Study data Periodic Assessment Data, NYS Common Core Assessment data; Attendance data, Case Study data Periodic Assessment Data, NYS Common Core Assessment data; Attendance data, Case Study data Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Ready literacy; AVID Study Skills; Expeditionary Learning Program. Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Push-in; Pull Out for grades 6-8 School Day, After School and Saturday Academy Ready Math; AVID Study Skills; CMP3 Math for grades 6-8 Push-in; Pull Out; Small Group for grades 6-8 School Day, After School and Saturday Academy Project Based Instruction for grades 6-8 Small Groups for grades 6-8 School Day, After School and Saturday Academy Project Based Instruction for grades 6-8 Small Groups for grades 6-8 School Day, After School and Saturday Academy One on One; small group as indicated in IEP; Case studies for grades 6-8 Pull Out for grades 6- 8 School Day, After School and Saturday Academy 6  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) n/a 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. n/a Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). 16 students 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 7 We will provide students in temporary housing with resources and materials, such as backpacks, notebooks, binders, pens and other school supplies, as well as sanitary items. In addition, we will provide students with uniforms. On a case by case basis, students may receive counseling when needed, and a weekly visit from the attendance teacher. 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. N/A 8  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools X Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. Partnership with the NYC Teaching Fellows, Math For America. Creation of a personnel committee; review of resumes and phone interviews; in person interview and lesson presentation 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). We will use our weekly professional development sessions to engage staff in common core learning. In addition, we will provide the following: Mentoring, Lead Teacher and Consultant support; classroom inter-visitations and lesson video-taping. Teacher MOTP and MOSL will be reviewed to determine if teachers are highly qualified. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. n/a 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). n/a 9  Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). n/a 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. n/a 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Column B Verify with an (X) Section Reference(s) Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. 0  Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 1  2  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. 09X594 New Pathways Academy, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. 09X594 New Pathways Academy will support parents and families of Title I students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; 3  ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the 09X594 New Pathways Academy will: Parental Involvement and School Quality ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; 4  ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help. Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) 09X594 New Pathways Academy , in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Meet State Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) 5  Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year. Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences. Provide general support to parents by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; 6  ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs. ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; 7  ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child. ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; III. Student Responsibilities ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 8  Addendum: Community School Partnerships Directions: The Community School (CS) strategy is directly aligned to the Framework for Great Schools. Community Schools bring schools and community partners together and integrate academics, health, youth development, and family engagement to provide students with the tools and opportunities they need to succeed. The Core Services in Community Schools are Expanded Learning Time (ELT), Attendance Supports, Family Engagement, and Health & Wellness. Part 1 – Community School Partnerships Goal(s) How is the CS strategy integrated into academic instruction at your school, and what impact has it had on student academic outcomes? The community school strategy aims to provide robust academic enrichment and expanded learning time in order to raise students' academic outcomes. By participating in academic enrichment after school on Wednesdays, Thursdays and Saturdays with the use of the i-Ready curriculum and individualized learning model, students will receive targeted academic intervention that is appropriate to their ELA and Math level. Indicate the summative goal(s) of the Community School for the 2018-19 school year. Be sure to construct the goal to be SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Realistic, and Time-bound. By June 2019, the community school model will leverage the joint efforts of the school’s campus partners to ensure that 100% of students and families are impacted by at minimum 25% of supports/interventions/services available under the community schools model as outlined by the CBO partnerships in place. This will continue to be achieved through targeted programming utilizing shared CBO providers (LEAP after school programming, for example); shared health and mental health services; parent and family focused workshops, classes, and events; evidence based programs for student leadership and mentoring; and creating systems for sustainable data tracking targeting improvement of student attendance and parent/family engagement. Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Community School Annual Goal(s): How will achieving your Community School Goal(s)--in Expanded Learning Time (ELT), Attendance Supports, Family Engagement, and Health & Wellness--support your academic goals for students? Center for Supportive Schools (CSS) is the school’s lead CBO partner. In partnership with the school, CSS has hired a Community School Director who will be responsible for the day-to-day management of the community school strategy, facilitating and providing leadership for the collaborative process of developing a continuum of services for children, families, and community members. The Director will drive development of community school action plans and planning for sustainability. The CSS team will track the school’s progress against performance goals, collect school data, and support program evaluation activities and manage partnerships. The Director will ensure that the community school strategy is implemented at exceptional levels of quality with full support, buy-in, and regular communication with stakeholders across the school community. Specific position responsibilities will include:  Build and maintain relationships with administration, faculty, staff, students, parents, and community partners • Organize and expand upon the membership of the Community School Team (CST) to include diverse school community stakeholders and CBOs • Conduct a needs assessment process, including: reviewing school and student-level data; conducting focus groups with parents, students, faculty, staff, administrators, and community partners; and reviewing and/or conducting school climate and culture survey 9  • Conduct a community asset assessment to identify viable partnerships that can meet the needs of students and families of the school community, including developing metrics for partnership evaluation • Recruit and develop partnership agreements with people and community organizations willing to offer programs and services for students and families at the school in accordance with identified needs • Identify evidence and research-based practices and/or partnerships that address priority areas for the community school strategy, which may include but are not limited to: Parent/Family Engagement; Community Engagement; Youth Development; Academic Rigor and Instructional Practices; Health and Mental Health; Tutoring; After school programming; Mentoring; and Early Childhood • Develop, maintain, and publicize a schedule of programs and activities offered at the school • Implement and maintain a process that encourages referrals to programs and services offered at the school • Identify needs of chronically absent students, apply interventions, and track and monitor impact of interventions on weekly basis, as part of weekly Student Success Summit • Collect and monitor program implementation data and student data for each partnership that allow easy data analysis and interaction by the SLT and other school stakeholders Working with the principal, SLT, and CST, the Community School Director will identify specialist partnerships to provide comprehensive expanded learning and enrichment opportunities, and mental health services to meet the needs of all students. The school’s current partnerships with CBOs such as LEAP and Ivy Key will be expanded to provide academic enrichment after school. In addition, CSS and the school will identify and implement additional partnerships to provide academic support in math, science, and ELA that create additional opportunities for students to engage in content and support teachers in developing project-based, engaging instructional practices that can be integrated into curriculum. A mental health partner will be identified in partnership with the assigned Mental Health Manager to provide Social Worker(s) and additional mental health resources for students and families. The Director will conduct a weekly meeting with the Principal, Assistant Principal, key staff, and representatives from other CBO partners, to analyze trends in data and case manage individual students. The Director will provide a data summary for the team to review at each meeting. Each team member will also come prepared to discuss key questions and updates in areas of community school work where they are taking initiative. Each week, a selected 2-3 team members will also come prepared to discuss individual students and families to strategize with the team about how to provide improved support using a case conferencing model. Part 2 – Community School Partnerships Core Services Action Plan Part 2a. Identify the Community-based Organization (CBO) partnerships that you will develop in ELT, Attendance Supports, Family Engagement, and Health & Wellness, their target student population(s), and scope of the services provided. As well as supporting schools’ supportive environment and attendance work, CBOs should be helping to support your school’s instructional focus. CBO Partnership Target Population Scope of Service LEAP - ELT/afterschool Programming Programming available to all students ELT/afterschool programming SY18-19 SMART Goal 65% of students enrolled 0  Astor Services for Children & Families All students and families focused on STEM, ELA, math Mental health counseling, family resource connections, mental health workshops, Article 31 clinic 30 students and families serviced Part 3 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 3a. Indicate resources your Community Partnership will leverage to achieve your summative SMART goal(s) and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. CSS will leverage the Community School grant to implement its action plan. In addition, the Community School Director will leverage community partners and members of the campus community to produce outcomes. Part 3b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) Title I SWP Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century C4E School Achievement X Other Funding Part 3c. Describe how the school will partner with the Lead CBO to do the following: 1. Community Schools are expected to partner with a community-based partner organization (CBO) and together with members of the School Leadership Team, hire a Community School Director. The Director will lead implementation of the asset and needs assessment process, and other critically important coordinating activities. Indicate how you will leverage this aspect of the work. Community Schools are expected to personalize the needs of all students, through strategic programming and services, as determined by the asset and needs assessment, and must also offer Expanded Learning Time (ELT) and mental health programming. In completing this section, ensure that you think about how: (1) the right services are provided to the right students and families at the right time; and (2) how you will seamlessly coordinate services with instructional programming happening throughout and outside of the school day. Indicate how you will implement this work, and describe other programming you anticipate to be in place to strengthen this initiative. Community Schools are expected to emerge as Partnership Schools, which are places where parents and families feel welcome, actively participate in the conversation and decision-making around the renewal of their schools, and have many opportunities to advocate for their children. Monthly meetings and Community School Forums engaging families and community stakeholders will be a critical part of this family engagement strategy. Describe how you will implement this aspect of the work. Community School Principals are expected to meet on a weekly basis with their Community School Director, select Assistant Principals, key staff, and other CBOs, to analyze trends in data and case manage individual students. Data tools – including the New Visions Data Sorter - and training will be available for schools to use. Indicate how you will implement this aspect of the work. 2. 3. 4. 1  CSS requires all partners to submit monthly impact reports assessing program quality based upon measures defined in the partnership agreements. These reports will serve as an ongoing common framework for communication between the CSS and the school and partners. CSS will use a variety of mechanisms to track progress. Data will be presented on each outcome in Community School Team and School Leadership Team meeting within a "data snapshot" where the comprehensive data can be viewed in one dashboard view. This data will be used to assess progress towards meeting the above defined outcomes and to address challenges if outcomes are not being met. Specific ways to track progress for key outcomes include: · Successful implementation and operation of the Community School Team will be tracked based on: representative composition from all community stakeholders; number of members committed to the team compared to average meeting attendance; evaluations completed after CST meetings that assess the extent to which each member finds the meetings to be well-managed, collaborative, and productive. · Increased parent engagement will be tracked based on: participation in Parent Association meetings; participation in ongoing needs assessment and feedback activities; participation in parent services provided; the number of parents who assume specific roles in the Community Schools effort; participation in parent-teacher conferences; teachers who report developing positive relationships with parents through weekly phone calls and other means of communication; parents who report developing positive relationships with teachers through weekly phone calls and other means of communication. · Increased student participation in expanded learning and enrichment activities will be tracked based on: attendance in activities; inventory and evaluation of services and activities provided; the number of students who assume leadership roles in expanded learning and enrichment activities. · Increased utilization rates for mental health services and improved mental health will be tracked based on: the number and demographics of students and families that participate in services compared to the entire target population; frequency of support utilized compared with recommended frequency of support provided; evaluations from students and families reporting on perceived impact of services; student academic performance data improvements and other on-track indicator improvements. · Increased school resources will be tracked based on: the estimated value of in-kind services rendered; targeted students served before and after implementation of community school strategy and estimated cost per student; and value of additional resources generated for the school to provide community school services and support by CSS and/or other CBO partners Part 4 – Community School Partnerships Oversight Part 4a. Key Staff and Partners 1. Name and describe the scope of involvement of all community partners working in the school (include partners supporting ELT, counseling, enrichment, etc.) 2. Name the members of your Community School Team and how meetings will be organized and structured to engage all stakeholders and be focused on results. 3. Explain data strategies including the use of the data sorter, and steps that the school will take to ensure that the appropriate interventions are provided to the right students Center for Supportive Schools (CSS) in partnership with school leadership will implement the Community School program and provide oversight. Key personnel include: · Community School Director (CSD) will drive the day-to-day implementation of the Community School program, as described above. 2  · The Principal will provide general oversight and will participate in all SLT and CST meetings. · The Parent Coordinator will be a leader in outreaching and engaging parents to attend school events · Representatives from partners such as LEAP, Ivy Key, Astor Services, Montefiore (SBHC), and other identified partners will provide monthly reports on progress and challenges to the CST in accordance with their service agreements where applicable. After school enrichment will be structured as follows: · Teachers will have the opportunity to provide academic enrichment to students on Wednesdays and Thursdays using i-Ready. . · Teaching artists through organizations like LEAP will be engaged to provide engaging ELA and social studies content through projects-based learning opportunities after school. Part 4b. Indicate resources needed including human resources, instructional resources, and schedule adjustments to implement the Community School program. · Teachers will be requested to provide support for academic enrichment after school. · Additional professional development for teachers will be provided through CSS and other identified partners. Part 4c. Timeline for implementation and completion, including start and end dates. A needs and asset assessment will be completed July through December 2018. Partnerships will be in place and communicated with teachers by August 2018. Monthly Community School Team meeting engaging parents and community partners will begin no later than September 2018 and will continue through June 2019. Part 4d. Mental Health Work Plan Separate from this S/CEP, schools will complete a Mental Health Work Plan that will become an addendum to this document. 3  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 4 Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits)  Per session  Per diem 5  Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL 6  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 09 School Name NEW PATHWAYS ACADEMY Borough Bronx School Number 594 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal 1 Coach 1 ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher 1 Teacher/Subject Area 1 Teacher/Subject Area 0 Related-Service Provider 3 Superintendent 1 Assistant Principal 0 Coach 0 School Counselor 1 Parent 1 Parent Coordinator 1 Field Support Center Staff Member 1 Other (Name and Title) 0 C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 0 2 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 199 7 Total number of ELLs 60 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 30.15%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 1 3 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 K 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 4 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 2 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 5 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 6 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 7 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 8 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 9 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? All new incoming ELLs are administered the NYSITELL, and the Spanish LAB R. We administer these exams to assess their skills in the four modalities and gather data to inform and create instructional plans for each student. We use the I-Ready program to determine student growth using an initial diagnostic and periodic assessment. This program also informs our future instruction to meet the needs of every student. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? The ENL Coordinator, ENL Teacher, and staff work collaboratively to plan and instruct, making accommodations as needed to meet the different proficiency levels of all students. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? 8  The ENL program will use formative and summative assessments to inform future instruction in specific areas of learning the students may be struggling with. Success will be measured by the progress on state assessments and the student's performance on formative in-class assessments for the Milestones Curriculum and I-Ready program. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? The ENL coordinator, ENL teacher, and grade teams meet bi-monthly to discuss student progress with content teachers. Accommodations are made based on the individual needs of each student's progress and information gathered from informative, and summative assessments. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] N/A 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. At New Pathways Academy the majority of our students tested Transitioning on the NYSESLAT exam. These scores show that students are advancing in their proficiency levels but are struggling to make the commanding level of their language acquisition stage. This data highlights the need for differentiated instruction, and scaffolding instruction that will help students advance in their language acquisition stage. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? Data analyzed is disseminated to grade teams during their bi-monthly meetings. At that time, ENL teachers are able to share with core classroom instructors the data outcomes of their students and provide supports for language acquisition. Additionally, at the beginning of each semester, the ENL teachers and the program chair meet to review student placements in ENL courses and service delivery options. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. ENL programs consist of 4 classes (200 minutes) weekly of integrated ENL for transitioning, and expanding students with 4 classes (200 minutes) each weekly of standalone ENL for entering, and emerging students. In the ENL program, the model used is integrated differentiated language instruction, and standalone ENL scaffolded for ELLs with IEPs in self-contained special education classes. For ENL programs, a certified TESOL ELL Programming teacher works with the certified subject area teacher to provide English language scaffolding to support grade-level content for all levels of proficiency. In this program, we use block and heterogeneous grouping. ELLs in 6th-8th grades who receive ENL instruction remain with their home class for content instruction with integrated ENL support. Students in the 6th-8th grade general education classes have a twice a week advisory class of ENL and reading skills, which is not graded and homogeneous: newcomer students in 6th-8th grade receive beginner ENL instruction, while transitioning and expanding students in all grades receive differentiated reading and writing instruction. b. TBE program. If applicable. N/A c. DL program. If applicable. N/A 9  2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? ENL program consist of eight classes of ENL (integrated/standalone) weekly (400 minutes) for entering, emerging and transitioning students. Expanding students have 4 classes weekly (200 minutes) of integrated ENL and 4 classes weekly (200 minutes) ELA. To accommodate the instructional needs and requirements of our heterogeneous class populations, we provide ENL instruction within content classes using collaborative teaching methods and grouping based on academic and language proficiency levels. ENL programs consist of 4 classes (200 minutes) weekly of integrated ENL for expanding students and 4 classes (200 minutes) each weekly of integrated and standalone ENL for entering, emerging, and transitioning students. In addition, this year we have ELLs from 2 language groups (Spanish, French). To ensure mandated instructional minutes and instructional needs of students are met at all language proficiency levels, we use flexible small group instruction based on ongoing assessments 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. Content areas of math, science, and humanities/history include standard, varied, grade-level instruction for students in the ENL program. All content courses are provided by instructors certified in their area, using native language where possible to make content comprehensible, and ENL scaffolding strategies to enhance language development. history instructors, math and science instructors have the support of integrated ENL certified teachers. All content courses use bilingual dictionaries and content-specific glossaries for student native language support, and the history class uses an English, Spanish, French version of the text. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? To ensure that ELL's are appropriately evaluated, the ENL program incorporates ongoing formative and summative assessments in Spanish, and French for reading and writing. Content teachers provide translated versions of tests, and/or provide glossaries for students. Math teachers use Spanish, and French versions of periodic assessments and annual exams. In addition, ELL's participating in our Free Standing ENL program are provided with formative and summative assessments in their native language as well. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status Instruction is differentiated for all ELL subgroups. New Pathways Academy uses the I-Ready program and extended instructional days (twice weekly, additional 2 hours instruction in reading and math) to build student strengths in language, literacy, and math. In addition, to these added instructional supports, the following instructional differentiation is provided for specific ELL subgroups: SIFE Students: SIFE students (currently there is 1 student in 6th grade, 1 student in 7th grade) receive additional instructional support via meetings with content teachers and ENL teacher to discuss and address weaknesses. They receive weekly integrated and standalone ENL instruction, and attend extended day programs 5 hours per week for additional literacy and math support. Newcomers: Spanish-speaking newcomers use and have access to ENL materials in all classes, and receive native language support from bilingual Spanish-speaking teachers and staff. Recently arrived students (less than one year in US schools) receive additional standalone intensive, structured ENL instruction. ENL instruction is aligned with ELA curriculum to benefit all ELL's, particularly those in their 2nd year of US schools instruction who will be tested in ELA for the first time. 2nd year ELLs complete periodic assessments in ELA, while 1st year ELLs complete ENL periodic assessments. Developing: ELLs in US schools 4-6 years: Administrators and teachers analyze available and current test data (NYSESLAT, ELA, and Math, content areas assessments) to determine instructional areas of greatest need and target instruction accordingly to 0  promote language acquisition in all four domains. In-class instructional grouping allows targeted intervention to promote progress and challenge. Long Term ELLs: Long-term ELLs (more than 6 years): Administrators and teachers analyze available and current test data (NYSESLAT, ELA, Math, periodic content assessments) to determine instructional areas of greatest need and target instruction accordingly to promote language acquisition in all four domains, with an emphasis on academic language building and application. In addition, these students are prioritized for receiving additional afterschool instruction in literacy and math. Former ELLs: ELLs achieving proficiency on NYSESLAT receive .5 unit of ENL services for two years. They will have continuing transitional support within classes from content teachers and ENL instructors who meet regularly to learn and apply ENL teaching methodologies to support continued language support and development. All teachers at New Pathways Academy participate in weekly group team meetings, at which individual student needs and instructional strategies are discussed. Teachers will also receive regularly scheduled professional development on ELL instructional strategies during the year through the Language Allocation Policy Team. Proficient ELLs continue to receive native language support using dictionaries and glossaries in all content classes, plus ELA and math support with I-Ready, and extended day ELA and math instruction. Former ELLs receive testing accommodations for up to two years after testing out, based on recommendations by classroom teachers for optimal student support. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? ENL instructors work with certified special educators and therapists to build language proficiency in accordance with students' other instructional and learning needs, and with mandated accommodations for individual students. All ELL-SWDs receive instruction from both special educators, and certified ENL teachers, in self-contained, push-in, or pull-out settings depending on their assigned class and IEP. Teachers of ELL-SWDs provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development through the Milestones text series (Heinle-Cengage Learning), research-based curricula to build language in all domains, using text from a variety of content areas, including ELA, history, science, and math. The series contains both text, audio, and multi-media features to engage students. Classes are differentiated by proficiency level, to target specific areas of academic and English developmental needs, from entering to expanding students. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? To meet the needs of ELL-SWDs within the least restrictive environment, these students receive ENL or bilingual instruction as specified in their IEPs, in addition to mandated services in self-contained, collaborative team-teaching, or general education settings. ELL-SWDs who are in general education and ICT settings participate in all classes with their general education, non-disabled peers. Those who are in self-contained (12-1 or 12-1-1) settings participate in P.E. and all non-instructional aspects of the school day with non-disabled peers from other classes. All ELLs, including ELL-SWDs, are eligible to attend extended day and Saturday academy programs, which are conducted in mixed student groups. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. New Pathways Academy offers the following online intervention programs for ELLs in ELA and Math: ELA: New Pathways Academy uses the I-Ready program for individualized, targeted reading intervention. This program is recommended and research-proven effective for ELL's and other students reading below grade level. The program is in English with a Spanish audio support component, plus additional native language support from ENL certified instructors. In addition, ELL's attend the extended day program for additional 1:15 minutes of literacy instruction, including reading comprehension and writing skills. Math: ELL's attend the extended day program for additional 1:15 minutes of math instruction, including computation and grade-level concept skills. Social Studies and Science: we provide small group instruction and translation services for ELL students to ensure that they make progress in all content areas. Students that need extra support in these areas are identified for additional instruction during our after school program 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? 1  Based on current data and trends, we have identified that our newly arrivals are lacking basic skills in reading and writing To address this need, we have provided more integrated ENL services. Bilingual staff are co-teaching with content area teachers to provide extra support. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? We have not discontinued any of our programs. ( We don't have a bilingual program). 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. All ELL’s at New Pathways Academy have equal access to all school programs, including service learning roles, after-school clubs, extended day instructional programs, AVID advisory class, and off-campus learning trips. We also offer after school and Saturday school programs for math and literacy development. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. Instructional materials for ELLs include a range of bilingual Spanish texts and leveled readers in the content areas. All ELLs use IReady to build literacy skills, with access to both English and Spanish audio and text. This program has been proven to increase reading scores for all students, including ELLs, and is particularly effective for SIFE and long-term ELLs. Most classes are equipped with Promethean Boards to promote multimedia accessibility, including alternate languages, plus all students use laptops for research and project-based learning in content classes. ELL students are able to use Ipads in class so that they can read the classroom text in their native languages. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Spanish-speaking ELLs in the ENL program receives support from the ENL instructor who speaks Spanish and bilingual paraprofessionals. Currently, there are 2 languages represented in our ELL population, although Spanish is the only language shared by instructors. New ELLs of other languages are placed in classes with other native speakers, if possible. We also provided them with bilingual glossaries and dictionaries. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. New Pathways Academy opened in September 2018 with 6th, 7th, and 8th grade. All instruction is linked to and guided by NYS 6th, 7th and 8th grade common core standards for content and literacy. All the services and resources are adapted for ELLs and according to their language proficiency and /or cognitive levels. Teachers use individualized student data to scaffold instruction such as creating graphic, modifying text density, and providing texts in their student native language. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? There are three schools located in our building but each 8th-grade different floors. The only shared spaces are the cafeteria, gym, auditorium, 3rd floor bathroom, and a small wing on the third floor. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). New Pathways Academy conducts a summer orientation session for all students in August, one week before the first day of school. In this orientation, all students (including new ELLs) and their parents meet teachers, learn about class expectations and requirements, tour the school, and engage in team building activities to build friendships and school culture. Orientation also enables instructors to begin assessing student needs and begin planning instructional programs, including student grouping. We also have an ELL parent night in which teachers and parents discuss students’ academic goals and resources for instructional support. An ENL monthly breakfast is provided for ELL students. This serves as an opportunity to assist with the socio-emotional aspects of transitioning into a new language. Students check-in with staff members and disclose how they are acclimating to their new environment. The ENL coordinator, ENL teacher, and principal. The following staff members maintain an open and constant communication with parents throughout the year through phone calls as well: Ms. Delilah Perez/ENL 2  Coordinator, Mr. Camacho/ ENL teacher, and Ms.Eva Laureano/ Parent coordinator. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? 6th, 7th, and 8th grade students, including expanding ELLs in the ENL program, take Spanish language elective. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? N/A Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? ENL instructors will attend various professional development workshops throughout the year, including the Language Allocation Policy (LAP) Development workshop in October. ENL, common branch and subject area teachers will attend additional workshops for working with English Language Learners in their content areas throughout the year, including working with ELLs in math and content areas. All teachers, including ENL, common branch, and subject area teachers, participate in weekly grade team meetings to discuss student needs and instructional strategies across all content areas. ENL teachers have an additional bi-monthly meeting specifically to share instructional best practices, targeted interventions, and address data-determined student needs. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. Professional development is currently underway for all staff on promoting the critical thinking routines/writing routines that are necessary for high school. Teachers of 8th graders, including ELLs, meet weekly to ensure that English acquisition is linked to content and common core standards, and aligned with regents’ material. All 8th graders also receive weekly guidance on the High School application process, and preparation for High School setting and course-work. Our guidance counselor supports students’ transition to high school by providing them with the information they need to effectively apply and find a good match for High school. To meet the new professional development requirements and as a continuation from last year, all New Pathways Academy staff members participate in our PD initiative on differentiation, which includes examination of expert knowledge on what is differentiation and how to apply it in the classroom, book analyses on differentiating instruction for all learners, dissecting case studies of differentiation across content areas, and finally, analyzing current lesson plans to observe evidence of differentiation. Staff meets with grade teams weekly to discuss school and student-specific issues and share best practice instruction for all subgroups, including ELLs. Participating staff include Principal, ENL/common branch/subject area teachers, paraprofessionals, guidance counselor, secretaries, and parent coordinator. Copies of the agendas and sign-in sheets for all training sessions will be kept on file with the ENL coordinator. 3  Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? NPA provides an ENL parent night to meet with the parents or guardians of English Language Learners to discuss the goals of the program, their child’s language development progress, their child’s English language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas. All our teachers participate to inform the parents or guardians about the child’s language development in all content areas in English. This meeting is conducted with a qualified interpreter/translator (ENL or parent coordinator for Spanish, or a translation provider for other languages) in the language or mode of communication the parent or guardian best understands. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Parental involvement at NPA is fostered through PTA meetings, SLT meetings, and parent-teacher conferences. Curriculum night took place on September 20th, 2018 and was well attended by many current and proficient ENL students and parents. A Spanish translator was provided for all teacher presentations and to facilitate parent questions. NPA also uses technology to promote parent involvement including Jupitergrades a web-based grading and communication system which allows students and their parents to check assignments and grades, and communicate with each teacher. Oral and written communication is always provided in the parent preferred language. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. N/A 4 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Lyne James Turnbull , testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 5  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: New Pathways Academy School DBN: 09x594 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Lyne James Turnbull Title Principal n/a Assistant Principal Eva Laureano Parent Coordinator Delilah Perez ENL/Bilingual Teacher Nancy Rodriguez Parent Ricardo Camacho Teacher/Subject Area Eunice Asare Teacher/Subject Area Richard Sharpe n/a Coach Coach Denise Gutierrez School Counselor Leticia Rosario Caterina Di Tillio n/a n/a n/a Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member n/a Other n/a Other n/a Other n/a Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 6  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: School Name: Superintendent: The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-2019 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No (*Primary) * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral 7  3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families Include procedures and translation resources to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide interpretation service(s)? 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents 8  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? 9 
