 16K040 School Name: P.S. 040 GEORGE W. CARVER Principal: LOUISE ANTOINE 2018-19 CEP-CS 1  Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC)   School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information George Washington Carver School 16K040 331600010040 3-K through 5 th Grade School Number (DBN): 265 Ralph Ave, Brooklyn, New York 11233 718-574-2353 Phone Number: 718-453-0686 Fax: Louise Antoine lantoin@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Geographical District: 16 Email Address: Louise Antoine UnaCameronlee ShaniquaSmall Una CameronLee ShaniquaSmall N/A N/A LLoydWebberBey District Information RaheshaAmon Superintendent: 1010 Lafayette Ave Room 135, Brooklyn, New York 11233 Superintendent’s Office Address: ramon@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718-574-2834 Phone Number: 718-453-1048 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC)   Brooklyn North Bernadette Fitzgerald FSC: Executive Director: 131 Livingston street, Brooklyn, New York, 11201 Executive Director’s Office Address: bfitzge@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 718-953-3954 Phone Number: 718-935-2382 Fax:   Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Louise Antoine Ann Marie Parente ShaniquaSmall Sheila Oakley Felicia Graybill N/A N/A Mr. Webber Bey N/A N/A N/A *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/ Member/ Member/   Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) KeishaGayle Simone Small Christine Chang Martha Smith Maxine Smith Lathasha Williams Maureen Joseph Member/ Elected Parent Member/ Elected DC37 Member/ Elected UFT Member/Elected UFT Member/ Elected CSA Member/Elected Parent Member/Elected Parent Member/Elected Parent Member/Elected Parent   Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with   the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement   Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Our young learners are actively engaged in Common Core Standards-based learning. There is a mutual respect for all cultures and learning abilities. The students and staff are held to high expectations, and data is used to enhance student performance in all areas. Parental and community involvement are encouraged and supported. We are a collaborative school community dedicated to providing quality education for our students. We maintain high standards and work towards the constant pursuit of academic excellence by:   ● Supporting a standard driven instructional program promoting rich civic and favorable social experiences Fostering positive self-image, self – respect and respect for others in a nurturing atmosphere; ● Encouraging awareness and appreciation for a culturally diverse environment ● Supporting a variety of academic programs and services which build excellence using a diagnostic, prescriptive approach to meet the individual needs of the student ● Preparing our students to compete in a highly technological society 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. George Washington Carver School is a place where the environment is safe for all. We are a zone school. It is a combined elementary school with a population of students from Pre-K through grade 5. This school is located in the Bedford Stuyvesant section of Brooklyn, New York with approximately 315 students from culturally diverse backgrounds. The school population attracted students from all sections of District 16. The average attendance rate for both students and teachers for the school year 2015/2016 was 93%. P.S.40 ethnic make-up is the following: Asian 3.66%; Hispanic 17.33%; Black 76.66%; White 1%; Hispanic 17.33%; American Indian 0.33% ; Native Hawaiian 1% . Percentage gender: Male: 54.66% ; Female: 45.33%; IEP students 21.4% ; % ELLs 6.6% ; students; eligible for Title 1 funding – 81.7%. To further deepen instruction, teachers extend student writing across the content areas with an emphasis on building academic vocabulary. As a school, we believe that students learn best when they're actually engaged in a rational process guided by a standard-based, rigorous curriculum, understanding the assessment criteria, so that they and the teacher are aware of the intended outcomes. They also learn best when they receive scaffolded instruction that includes teacher demonstration, guided practice, active engagement, and assessment to determine mastery. As a school we recognize that all children have multiple intelligences and different learning styles. As educators, we create an environment of high expectations and standards, which challenge our students to reach their maximum levels of performance in all academic areas. Parents, staff, administration and the community work together creating the best possible learning environment to support our students. Our academic programs prepare our students to become capable and concerned citizens of the world. Literacy, writing, mathematics, science, technology, and the arts play a central role in our school. They foster creativity, develop imagination and inspire innovation. Our goal is to provide maximum opportunities for all children. We strive to improve the quality of teaching and learning through intensive professional development envisioning a learning environment which nurtures children, maximizes opportunities for individual growth and develop a lifelong love of learning. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. 0  We have constant push-in, pull-out model for English Language Learners and Students with Disabilities. English Language learners, lowest one-third, and Students with Disabilities are given varied entry points in order to produce work that meets standards. Technology supports all students for differentiation. Manipulatives are used to ensure students can move from concrete to abstract (ELLs, lower one-third, and SWDs). 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. The PS 40 community defines rigor as challenging instruction that is aligned with the Common Core State Standards infusing the instructional shifts to extend effective teaching and learning. Evidence of rigor in our classrooms are as follows: *clear objectives that are written with assessment in mind *learning activities that are aligned with instructional outcomes *questions that check for understanding, promote critical thinking, and increase student engagement *differentiated instruction - content, process, and product *self-evaluation through use of rubrics, checklist, exit slips, and homework 1  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 16K040 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration PK,0K,01,02,03,04,05 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 318 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 40 41 18 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 30 31 18 18 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 86.0% % Attendance Rate 84.9% % Reduced Lunch 8.2% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 1.9% 21.7% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 1.3% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 3.18 0% 5% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 63.0% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 86% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A N/A N/A N/A NO Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A YES Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 2 2 1 90.5% 0.3% 19.8% 68.2% 4.4% 4.4% 2 0% 5.9 59.5% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No YES N/A N/A N/A YSH YES N/A N/A N/A YES YES N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Based on our 2017-2018 ELA and Math data, 63% of students in grades 3 to 5 scored at levels 3 and 4 and 60% of our students are on grade level for math. Our 2017-2018 Math and ELA analysis breakdown also indicate that the number of students scoring at levels 3 and 4 are increasing. The data also indicates that we have a vast majority of our students approaching grade level. Our 2017-2018 Quality Review highlighted our communication with families and our high expectations for students learning. As a school, we are continuously working on improving pedagogy in the classroom to engage all students in taking ownership of their learning. In reviewing the educational program P.S. 40, analyzing the reports generated by the Quality Snap Shot, and assessing the performance standards of our students in all core subjects, we have identified the following strengths, challenges and accomplishments: ● Throughout the school, teachers have developed a wide-range of resources in English Language Arts and Math, including ReadyGen, Writers' Strategies, EngageNY, NY Ready, the Social Studies and Science scope and sequence, StarFalls, Splash into Pre-K-a thematic approach in ELA, math, social studies, and science ● Social Studies curriculum is often integrated in ReadyGen units of study and Science is support by Houghton Mifflin and i-Ready personalized lessons. Teachers develop and revise curriculum maps based on data. ●English Language Arts and Mathematics Curriculum Maps are aligned with the Common Core Standards. The instructional shifts are integrated in all content areas with Opinion/Argumentative, Narrative, and Informational Writing. Interactive tiered vocabulary is included in all content areas, close reading of complex assignments, with an emphasis on higher order thinking questions and rigorous practice that results in consistency and the development of customized, challenging CCSS aligned resources. ● Push-in, Pull-out model for English Language Learners and students with disabilities. English Language learners, lowest one-third, and Students with Disabilities have varied entry points and products. Technology supports all students for differentiation and mastery. 3  The needs are: ● Project Based Learning ● Writing across content areas with an emphasis on academic vocabulary ● Implementing the Depth of Knowledge (DOK) in creating rigorous tasks and designing higher order thinking questions ● Ongoing, differentiated professional learning sessions Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 80% of students including students with disabilities and English Language Learners in grades K-5 will make at least one year's progress in their Reading Levels measured by the Teacher’s College Reading and Writing Project Benchmarks. 4  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs,  professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Differentiated professional learning sessions for all teachers focus on the components of Danielson Framework for Teaching. Curriculum team updates curriculum maps based on student data. Teachers Mondays, September 2018-June 2019 Teachers Instructional Coach Administrators Teams of teachers meet weekly to design, evaluate and revise curriculum maps and unit plans aligned to the Common Core Standards. Teachers use differentiated instructional strategies such as scaffolding, multiple entry points, technology (i-Ready), manipulatives, leveled libraries, common core-based rubrics and dictionaries to increase instructional supports. Students write in subject areas demonstrating knowledge of content-specific vocabulary. Teachers plan and use a range of questions that reach Depth of Knowledge levels three and four. Incorporate and develop student word banks and subject-specific word walls to improve understanding of words in context. Universal Design for Learning addresses the varying needs and learning styles of students. Parent coordinator coordinates workshops and delivery of information to families on fluency development. Math and ELA curriculum nights inform parents of the Common Core Standards of each grade level. Monthly calendar highlights targeted skills and units of study. Increase home-school connection with homework that includes project-based learning. Classroom, cluster, and specialty teachers will provide feedback to ELL students and Students With Disabilities with suggestions and questions that will allow the learner to maintain ownerships and control over his/her work. This will be provided in student friendly language and on their appropriate grade level. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Classroom teachers, paraprofessionals, ELL teachers, Resource room Parents, Guardians Families October 2018 December 2018 February 2019 May 2019 October 2017 Teachers Instructional Coach Administrators Teachers Parent Coordinator March 2019 June 2019 Administrators Students Teachers September 2018- June 2019 Teachers Staff 5  How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. 0ctober 2018- June 2019, Parent workshops, Orientation meetings will be planned and presented by staff including the Parent Coordinator, Literacy Coach, Related Service Providers and teachers on a regular basis to share strategies and information with parents to support their child’s academic success and growth both in school and at home. Workshops may include topics such as “Understanding My Child’s IEP,” “Test Sophistication: ELA & Mathematics,” "Understanding the Common Core Curriculum" and "English as a New Language." Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. ● RESO-A Grant supports technology instruction - computer hardware ● TL Fair Student Funding purchased computer software - i-Ready ● NYSTL to purchase library books ● TL Strong School, Strong Communities to fund professional learning ● Go Math and ReadyGen instructional resources ● Common preparation periods Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP X Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A C4E X 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. ● By January 2019, 80 % of students will move one or more reading levels as measured by Teachers College running records. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) Teachers College Running Records 4x throughout the year. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 6  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? Attendance data shows 9% of our students display regular absences. Attendance intervention is needed to promote regular attendance. There has been an increase in chronic absenteeism by 5% from 2016-2017 to 2017-2018. Strengths: Attendance trips to motivate students to attend school Acknowledge/Award parents of students with perfect attendance Student of the month recognition Communication with parents (newsletters, phone messenger, school calendar, etc.) Global Connect Messaging System Needs: • Strategies to review attendance reports • Outreach to families • Innovative programs to motivate attendance Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, we will reduce the number of overall chronic absentees by 3% compared to the attendance data as of June 2018 increasing our yearly attendance rate by at least 2% as compared to June 2018 ATS attendance reports data. 7  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Identify students that are chronically absent; review and monitor attendance reports. Professional learning sessions to remind teachers of the Chancellor's Regulations on attendance and accurate attendance taking procedures. Students Teachers Attendance team outreach families of students absent more than ten or eighteen days in previous the year. Late students sign the late-book located in the main office. Clerical school aide conducts daily outreach, run and review attendance reports on a weekly basis to discuss the status of attendance. Parents Students Parents September 2018 Teachers January 2019 September 2018-June 2019 Administrators Attendance team Teachers Administrators Parents Attendance Team Clerical School Aide Teachers Administrators Guidance Counselor Attendance Team Teachers Administrators Guidance Counselors Parent Coordinator Attendance Teacher Set up structure of support for identified students (on a daily basis). Provide referral services to Community Based Organizations (CBOs). Guidance counselor meets with students and parents as needed. Uniform supplies for students including STH. Create a support plan that provides monthly incentives and/or in-house mentors for students and families . Students Parents September 2018-June 2019 Commitment ceremonies for parents, students and teachers. Post pictures of families in the lobby. Parents and students take a pledge to commit themselves to perfect attendance. Students Parents September 2018-June 2019 3b – Parent and Family Engagement 8  How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. On-going communication with parents through newsletters, monthly school calendar, and teacher conferencing. We will continue to present parent workshops monthly and at Parent Teacher Association meetings, informing parents and providing them with resources to support their children academically. Progress Reports and regular Parent/Teacher Conferences. Open House providing specific information, showcasing student work and achievements, homework help and answering questions to help parents provide support at home Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. ● P.S. 40 Attendance Plan ● Student Aggregate Attendance Report ● 407 Tracking System Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E X X Title I SWP X Title I TA 21st Century Grant SIG Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. ● By January 2019, of the targeted students in grades 1-5, 40% of students will have less than 8 absences. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. The weekly student attendance RCUA from ATS and the RRSC monthly student attendance in ATS. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 9  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. On our 2018 School Learning Environment Survey shows that of 100% of teachers who participated, 95% strongly agree teachers in our school work together on teams to improve instructional practice. Strengths: ● Teachers modify common core rubrics making them comprehensive and student friendly to support student understanding and assessment. ● Teachers participate in inter/intra Visitations  Professional Learning Communities ● Cross-curricula interactions; teachers modify rubrics to make them comprehensive, student friendly to align with student understanding. ● Grade level teacher teams collaborate weekly. During these monthly teacher meetings, teachers engage in deep level conversations. ● analysis of student work, sharing best practices within and across grade levels; update lessons, pacing calendars, and curriculum maps. ● Collaboration among teachers improves school-wide instructional practices with an emphasis on instruction. Needs: ● Higher level of engagement for individual instruction. ● More rigorous instruction. ● Greater increase in student performance ● Interdisciplinary teaching (Social Studies supports Literacy and Science supports Math) Part 2 – Annual Goal 0  Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 100% of teachers will continue to collaboratively use an inquiry approach to analyze student work, share best practices and plan instruction that results in a 50% increase in student mastery in writing as measured by a teacher created rubric. 1  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All teachers participate in bi-weekly, grade level inquiry meetings using ELA and Math protocols to analyze target student work. Maintain data and student folders to serve as resource and documentation for student performance and progress. Students Teachers Analyze student data obtained from formative and summative assessments, student work products and teacher notes to address strategies that improve and enhance teacher practice for all learners. Students engage in self-assessment and revision of goals. Students Teachers Teachers Teachers work collaboratively to revise and refine curricula and strategies with the Common Core Learning Standards. Professional learning community plan and present their findings and applications as they relate to action research (Danielson Framework for Teaching, Backward Design Lesson Planning/Understanding by Design) . Professional learning/common planning time used to design/customized lessons based on student data to meet student individualized needs. Grade level teams create and back-pack monthly newsletters sharing researched strategies used in classrooms. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Tuesdays, September 2018-June 2019 Tuesdays, September 2018-June 2019 September 2018-June 2019 Teachers Instructional Coach Administrators Teachers Instructional Coach Administrators Teachers Instructional Coach Administrators Students Parents September 2018-June 2019 Teachers Administrators How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Grade level teachers work collaboratively during Parent engagement time on Tuesdays to develop, plan and implement content workshops for parents. Monthly parent and community meetings with administration (Tea with the principal) focusing on Common Core Learning Standards curriculum workshops and strategies to support students with disabilities and English learners. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment 2  Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. ● RESO-A Grant supports technology instruction - computer hardware ● TL Fair Student Funding purchased computer software - i-Ready ● NYSTL to purchase library books ● TL Strong School, Strong Communities to fund professional learning ● Go Math and ReadyGen instructional resources ● Common preparation periods Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP X Title I TA 21st Century Grant SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. ● By January 2018, at least70% of students will move at least 1 level as measured by a teacher created rubric. ●By January 2018, at least 95% of teachers will collaborate in professional learning cycles using an inquiry approach. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. A teacher survey given in the beginning of the year and middle of the year. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 3  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. In the analysis of available Framework for Great Schools Report, there was an increase in the percentage of staff members that feel supported by their colleagues and administration. Our Strengths include:  Collaborative professional learning communities with an inquiry approach on analyzing instructional practice. Teams of the teachers work  100% of teachers feel supported by administration and 97% of staff feel inclusive in decision making in the building.  Professional learning scheduled to help teachers improve their ability to incorporate critical thinking and discourse into lessons with a focus on: o Clarifying and expanding teachers’ understanding of critical thinking o Exploring strategies to help teachers promote critical thinking in their classrooms. o Identifying and planning possible actions to support teachers. Needs:  The end of year Measures of Teacher practice data indicates that domain 3 is rated the lowest domain out of four at PS 40. 28% of our teachers were rated Highly Effective in Domain 3 as indicated on their final evaluations. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, administrators will engage teachers in at least 3 learning series in order to increase teachers’ capacity to develop high-level questions and high-quality units of study that include what students need to know and be able to do, which will result in a 5% performance increase in Danielson's Component 3c. 4  5  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Administrators will refine and sustain an environment of professional learning with a focus on Engaging students in learning. Administrators will meet monthly with lead teachers in order to identify and assess systems and structures that have been put in place by grade level in order to implement change across the school. Monthly data talks will be scheduled with teachers to analyze and identify trends in data in order to help move instructional practices. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All Teachers October Administrators 2018- June 2019 Lead Teachers Teachers will be introduced to a variety of methods that can improve pedagogy and content development. Professional development calendar will be developed in collaboration with teachers to show a variety of Professional Learning offerings. Professional development on planning and preparation. Professional learning will be scheduled to help teachers improve their monitoring, assessment, and follow-up with a focus developing and improving their questioning and discussion techniques. 4 Professional Series in questioning and discussion will be given throughout the year. Staff will participate in inter-visitations and on-site and off-site professional development that will enhance their instructional practice and raise the level of content knowledge. Teachers will collaborate with colleagues to create various ways to engage with parents including parent newsletters, parent workshops, and during monthly school events. All Teachers October Administrators 2018-June 2019 Lead Teachers All Teachers September 2018-June 2019 Teachers Staff September 2018-June 2019 Administrators Teachers Staff Teachers Staff Parents 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. 6  Monthly parent and community meetings with administration (Tea with the principal) focusing on Common Core Learning Standards curriculum workshops and strategies to support students with disabilities and English learners. Book study with parents to support parents with strategies and information to help communicate with their children. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. ● RESO-A Grant supports technology instruction - computer hardware ● TL Fair Student Funding purchased computer software - i-Ready ● NYSTL to purchase library books ● TL Strong School, Strong Communities to fund professional learning ● Go Math and ReadyGen instructional resources ● Common preparation periods Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By June 2019, 100% of teachers will be engaged in at least 2 professional learning series on developing and planning high level questions to engage students in learning. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Teacher survey given in the beginning of the year and middle of the year. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 7  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. An analysis of our 2018-2019 School Learning Environment Survey, parent workshop attendance sheets and PTA meeting attendance sheets, shows that while we have increased the number of parents that are involved in our school community we still have a large number of our parents do not attend school events and activities. Strengths:  100% of parents were satisfied with the instructional support they were provided on Tuesday's through the parental engagement time.  We have created an open door policy to that fosters a culture of mutual trust and positive attitude between the parents and staff. Needs:  According to Framework for Great Schools indicate 68% of parents feel that they were invited to volunteer at school this year. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 100% of parents will be invited to at least 5 collaborative parent workshops on developing rigorous, high-quality questions and authentic learning tasks that ensure students are engaged which will result in a 10% increase in parental participation as compared to the 2017-18 school year. 8  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Parent workshops, Orientation meetings will be planned and presented by staff including the Parent Coordinator, Literacy Coach, Related Service Providers and teachers on a regular basis to share strategies and information with parents to support their child’s academic success and growth both in school and at home. Workshops may include topics such as “Understanding My Child’s IEP,” “Test Sophistication: ELA & Mathematics,” "Understanding the Common Core Curriculum" and "English as a New Language." Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Parents September 2018- June 2019 Teachers Parents Parent Coordinator Staff Teachers Staff Grade level teachers work collaboratively during Parent engagement time on Tuesdays to develop, plan and implement content workshops for parents. Parents September 2018- June 2019 Monthly parent and community meetings with administration (Tea with the principal) focusing on Common Core Learning Standards curriculum workshops and strategies to support students with disabilities and English learners. Parents September 2018-June 2019 Teachers Parents SLT Staff Administrators Teachers Staff Administrators On-going communication with parents through newsletters, monthly school calendar, and teacher conferencing. We will continue to present parent workshops monthly and at Parent Teacher Association meetings, informing parents and providing them with resources to support their children academically. Progress Reports and regular Parent/Teacher Conferences. Open House providing specific information, showcasing student work and achievements, homework help and answering questions to help parents provide support at home. Parents September 2018- June 2019 3b – Parent and Family Engagement 9  If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. n/a Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. TL Fair Student Funding ● NYSTL to purchase library books ● TL Strong School, Strong Communities to fund professional learning ● Go Math and ReadyGen instructional resources ● Common preparation periods Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E X X Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA Title II, Part A SIG X PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, All Parents will be invited to at least 2 workshops to support them with standards taught and assessed within their child's class and there will be a 5% increase in parent participation as compared to 2017-2018 data. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. The instrument of measures will be meeting agendas and end of workshop reflection sheets. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 0  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Mathematics Science Social Studies At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) All Level 1 and 2 students in Grades 3 to 5 based on teacher assessments, evaluation and recommendations. All students who score levels 1 and 2 on state exams All students in grades 3 to 5 who score of less than level 3 in Math. All Level 2 students in Grades K to 5 based on teacher assessments, evaluations and recommendations. All Level 2 students in Grades K to 5 based on teacher assessments, evaluations and recommendations Based on teacher, guidance counselor, Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Grade K to 2 Decodable Practice Reading Grade 3 to 5 New York READY focus on Reading Comprehension and i-Ready Grade K to 2 Go-Math RTI Grades 3 to 5 STAMS Strategies to Achieve Mathematics Success and i-Ready, New York Ready, CAMS Repeated reading and interactive writing Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Academic Intervention services provided by push-in teachers in a small group setting, one-on-one tutoring ELA/AIS are provided within the regular school day 45 minute period, and during after school enrichment program Academic Intervention services provided by push-in teachers in a small group setting, one on one tutoring Services are provided after school and through differentiated instruction within the school day Small group, push- in and pull-out During content periods Repeated reading and interactive writing Small group, push- in and pull-out During content periods The school psychologist and social worker provide ERSSA for 10 weeks Individual/Group Counseling to support academic & social emotional During the school day 1  School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) school psychologist, recommendations. based on referrals. If further support services are needed parental consent is required. Guidance counselor also provides at risk counseling development. Parent workshops/referrals to enhance understanding of student needs in school environment. Conflict resolution, peer mediation, character education, bully prevention, HIV/AIDS, I Save curriculum, and health awareness sessions provided in whole class and small group settings . 2  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 64 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. The services that will be provided are assistance with clothing ( such as uniforms, coats, boots, etc), school supplies, dental care, eye exams and glasses, etc. and additional referrals for medical and mental health services for the entire family throughout the school year. The school continues to work collaboratively with the Sports and Arts After school program to provide additional academic and enrichment activities. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 3  N/A 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. N/A 4  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. All of our teachers are highly qualified and are teaching in their licensed area Prior to hiring a candidate, their credentials are verified by our Network’s HR Director to ensure that the candidate holds a valid NYS certification in that license area. Strategies and activities used to recruit, retain and support highly qualified teachers are indicated below: • Frequent communication with our HR Director when vacancies occur. • Central Office of Talent and Recruitment partners with colleges and the Network HR Director partners with Central for assistance and guidance and for candidate referrals. • Participating in Central Hiring Fair events where pre-screened HQT candidates are interviewed and recruited. • Interviewing HQT candidates from The Open Market Hiring System and The Absent Teacher Reserve (ATR) Pool. • Establishing a rigorous interview protocol that includes intensive criteria for the selection of new staff members including demonstration lessons, interviews, and New York State certification/licensing. • Maintaining a teacher resource center and professional library to promote promising and effective practices. • Teachers will be provided with curriculum maps, instructional resources and professional learning opportunities ● to ensure that teachers improve teaching practice as per ADVANCE and Danielson Framework for Teaching and are highly qualified. • New teachers are provided with a mentor • Teachers are encouraged to participate in after school Professional Learning and to attend off-site workshops when appropriate. 5  • Individualized PL plans are created for teachers to ensure continued improvement. • Carefully made teacher assignments are designed to match teacher talent with school needs. In the very rare event, if a teacher’s status was deemed not HQT, the principal would consult with the network Human Resources Director for guidance to ensure that the non-HQT teacher will meet all required documentation and teacher assessment deadlines. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). Teachers, administrators and paraprofessionals partake in weekly professional learning including the Common Core State Standards and Instructional Shifts. In addition staff members participate in professional learning workshops which are conducted by all teachers. Our school developed a comprehensive professional learning plan that addresses CCLS, Danielson Framework for Teaching our instructional focus and school-wide goals. Professional learning opportunities are also differentiated based on the needs of groups of teachers and individual teachers. Our high quality professional learning will include but not be limited to the following: • Teachers will participate in professional learning opportunities conducted by the network team, Talent Coach, content coach, instructional lead teachers and Assistant Principal in the content areas of ELA, Math, Science and Social Studies and how Danielson Framework for Teaching can support teaching practices in content areas. • The Principal, AP, and instructional lead teachers will attend workshops provided by the Network relating to CCLS and Danielson Framework for Teaching. They will turnkey the information and deliver workshops to teachers and paraprofessionals in the use of Depth of Knowledge, Essential questions, ongoing assessment practices to increase best practices to increase academic rigor in literacy, math, science and social studies aligned with CCLS. • Implementation of the new Core Curriculum ReadyGen for ELA and GoMath for Math will be supported through high quality professional learning for teachers and paraprofessionals delivered by the principal, AP, instructional coach, teacher development coach, and instructional leads network team members. • Teacher teams will be trained in how to use data effectively to develop flexible grouping, track student performance trends and plan strategies in order to monitor and revise their practices. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A 6  Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). P.S. 40 has a Transition Team which includes the Principal, Assistant Principal, School Counselor, IEP Teacher, and Parent Coordinator, who will work collaboratively to assist preschool children as they transition from early childhood programs to the elementary school program. Eligible students will be provided with intervention services to address academic and social/emotional needs. During the year, Pre-K teacher teams and Kindergarten teacher teams will evaluate curriculum for vertical and horizontal alignment through the lens of the Common Core Learning Standards to ensure a seamless transition from Pre-K to kindergarten. To ensure smooth transitions, the expectation is that our Pre-K and Kindergarten teachers will engage in team meetings focusing on CCLS for Early Childhood grades. Our school embraces a Parents-As-Partners model through professional learning opportunities and parent engagement activities that increase parent involvement, build parent effectiveness, deepen their understanding of CCLS while elevating high expectations for student learning. The Pre-K to K Transition Team will act as the steering committee for this initiative by meeting regularly throughout the school year to monitor the process and suggest revisions to actions and strategies in order to ensure a smooth transition from the early childhood Pre K program to the Kindergarten elementary school program. 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. The MOSL team attended Central and network professional learning sessions to become skilled at MOSL and the New ADVANCE teacher evaluation system. The MOSL team met numerous times to review all options. The Principal's decision, on the selection of the MOSL assessment measures, was informed by recommendations made by the MOSL team. Each month three hours of professional learning is scheduled to provide increased knowledge regarding the use of MOSL assessments and ADVANCE to improve instruction. In addition to MOSL, our school uses several appropriate assessment measures such as common prep and post unit assessments, predictive assessments, classroom assessments, and online assessments. Teacher teams examine student work and track student performance trends to establish flexible grouping and to provide scaffolds and extensions to accelerate student learning. The school also uses multiple assessment measures to inform professional learning opportunities that are scheduled throughout the year and are aligned with Danielson Framework for Teaching, the Core Curriculum in ELA and Math and to build teacher capacity in the use of data assessment results to improve instructional practice. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount 7  each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Title I Part A (Basic) Federal Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Federal Federal Federal Tax Levy (FSF) Local $211,320.48 $55,916.99 N/A N/A $1,819,445.95 X x N/A N/A x Column B Section Reference(s) Section 5A, 5B, 5C, 5D, 5E Section 5A, 5B, 5C, 5D, 5E N/A N/A Section 5A, 5B, 5C, 5D, 5E 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 8  2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 9  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. GEORGE WASHINGTON CARVER P.S. 40 SCHOOL - PARENT INVOLVEMENT POLICY Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. George Washington Carver Public School 40, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. George Washington Carver Public School 40 will support parents and families of Title I students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; 0  ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. Parental Involvement and School Quality In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in 1  the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the ESSA; ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. GEORGE WASHINGTON CARVER P.S. 40 SCHOOL - PARENT COMPACT School-Parent Compact (SPC) George Washington Carver Public School 40, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum 2  Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; 3  ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; Provide general support to parents by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities: II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; 4  ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; III. Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 5  Addendum: Community School Partnerships Directions: The Community School (CS) strategy is directly aligned to the Framework for Great Schools. Community Schools bring schools and community partners together and integrate academics, health, youth development, and family engagement to provide students with the tools and opportunities they need to succeed. The Core Services in Community Schools are Expanded Learning Time (ELT), Attendance Supports, Family Engagement, and Health & Wellness. Part 1 – Community School Partnerships Goal(s) How is the CS strategy integrated into academic instruction at your school, and what impact has it had on student academic outcomes? The Community School strategy will be embedded into the fabric of the school as such discussions will be held with teachers and instructional staff around academic themes, projects or other activities that will be help to inform the overall academic focus within the school. A Community Schools Educational Coordinator will be hired to foster ongoing collaboration and coordination and to ensure alignment throughout the school day and during extended learning time. Indicate the summative goal(s) of the Community School for the 2018-19 school year. Be sure to construct the goal to be SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Realistic, and Time-bound. 1. For the 2018-2019 school year, overall attendance will increase from 90.3% to 92% and the number of chronically absent students will be reduced by 5% from 28% to 23%. 2. The number of parents completing the Learning Environment Survey will increase by 10 % from 65% t0 75%. 3. Students will actively engaged in expanded learning activities by achieving an average daily attendance of 80%. 4. Community School Director will work with school based partner, New York Edge and other school based supports to increase the number of students receiving counseling and after school support. Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Community School Annual Goal(s): How will achieving your Community School Goal(s)--in Expanded Learning Time (ELT), Attendance Supports, Family Engagement, and Health & Wellness--support your academic goals for students? The goals were selected because they support and are align with PS 40’S Comprehensive Educational Plan. They are intended to build upon an agreed upon approach. It is therefore anticipated that the achieving the proposed outcomes will further enhance and add value to PS 40’s overall mission. Additionally, the goals will independently and collectively help to address barriers that are currently interfering with student academic progress. PS 40 collaboration with Community Schools and New York Edge will support the New York State ranking as a school in “Good Standing.” Part 2 – Community School Partnerships Core Services Action Plan Part 2a. Identify the Community-based Organization (CBO) partnerships that you will develop in ELT, Attendance Supports, Family Engagement, and Health & Wellness, their target student population(s), and scope of the services provided. As well as supporting schools’ supportive environment and attendance work, CBOs should be helping to support your school’s instructional focus. CBO Partnership Target Population Scope of SY18-19 SMART Goal SASF K-2 Service provide music support to students 3x a week. By June 2019, 100% of students in grades K-2 will engage in music lessons at least 3x a week. 6  SASF Part 3 – Budget and Resource Alignment K-5 after school program 5x a week from 2:40-5:00pm Part 3a. Indicate resources your Community Partnership will leverage to achieve your summative SMART goal(s) and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. SASF to support the music teacher, PS 40 and SASF staff to work in the Pre-K after school program, PS 40 staff members to work in the ELA and Math classes and homework help program. Part 3b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) Title I SWP Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside X 21st Century SIG Grant School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 3c. Describe how the school will partner with the Lead CBO to do the following: 1. Community Schools are expected to partner with a community-based partner organization (CBO) and together with members of the School Leadership Team, hire a Community School Director. The Director will lead implementation of the asset and needs assessment process, and other critically important coordinating activities. Indicate how you will leverage this aspect of the work. Community Schools are expected to personalize the needs of all students, through strategic programming and services, as determined by the asset and needs assessment, and must also offer Expanded Learning Time (ELT) and mental health programming. In completing this section, ensure that you think about how: (1) the right services are provided to the right students and families at the right time; and (2) how you will seamlessly coordinate services with instructional programming happening throughout and outside of the school day. Indicate how you will implement this work, and describe other programming you anticipate to be in place to strengthen this initiative. Community Schools are expected to emerge as Partnership Schools, which are places where parents and families feel welcome, actively participate in the conversation and decision-making around the renewal of their schools, and have many opportunities to advocate for their children. Monthly meetings and Community School Forums engaging families and community stakeholders will be a critical part of this family engagement strategy. Describe how you will implement this aspect of the work. Community School Principals are expected to meet on a weekly basis with their Community School Director, select Assistant Principals, key staff, and other CBOs, to analyze trends in data and case manage individual students. Data tools – including the New Visions Data Sorter - and training will be available for schools to use. Indicate how you will implement this aspect of the work. 2. 3. 4. The process for selecting a Community School Director will be highly collaborative involving all key stakeholders. The process will involve jointly agreeing on key responsibilities, qualifications and credentials. This will in turn inform the design of the job description. The goal is to identify at minimum three candidates that will then be jointly interviewed and ultimately selected through consensus. The process for conducting an asset and needs assessment and coordinating activities are tasks that have been identified as critical to the implementation of the Community Schools strategy at 161M. With support from the Lead 7  CBO, and school leadership the expectation will be shared with the entire school community. The Community School Director will lead the process involving key participants among teachers, staff, student and their families along with other CBO partners. The Community School Director will report back to the school community, sharing the results of the work and how the information will ultimately be translated into an action plan. Additionally, the Community School Director will lead provider meetings with representation from CBO partners and school providers to establish the process for ensuring alignment, planning and monitoring impact. Part 4 – Community School Partnerships Oversight Part 4a. Key Staff and Partners 1. Name and describe the scope of involvement of all community partners working in the school (include partners supporting ELT, counseling, enrichment, etc.) 2. Name the members of your Community School Team and how meetings will be organized and structured to engage all stakeholders and be focused on results. 3. Explain data strategies including the use of the data sorter, and steps that the school will take to ensure that the appropriate interventions are provided to the right students 1. . In the area of ELT; there is SASF. SASF will be responsible for providing after school enrichment, recreation to 180 students. The process of identifying additional partners continues and will ultimately be updated. 2. The CSD will be expected to focus on the areas of Health including mental health, ELT, Attendance, and Family Engagement. Part 4b. Indicate resources needed including human resources, instructional resources, and schedule adjustments to implement the Community School program. PS 40 Community Schools will want to use the budget to creatively address the 4 core service areas. Additionally, we will want support to ensure that we can effectively implement the Community Schools strategy of organizing all of the financial and human resources Part 4c. Timeline for implementation and completion, including start and end dates. July 2018-August 2019 – Visioning, Budget Development, Marketing, Recruitment of staff and Partner Meetings September 2018 – December 2018 – Phase 1 – Marketing/Initial Program Implementation January 2019 – June 2019 - Phase 2 – Programs continue. Needs Assessment. CS Forum Part 4d. Mental Health Work Plan Separate from this S/CEP, schools will complete a Mental Health Work Plan that will become an addendum to this document. 8  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 16 School Name Public School 40 Borough Brooklyn School Number 040 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Louise Antoine Coach ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Bridgette Buissereth Teacher/Subject Area Una CameronLee Teacher/Subject Area Lori Kamelhar Related-Service Provider Caterina Nondi Superintendent Rahesha Amon Assistant Principal Martha Smith Coach type here School Counselor Sabrina Wadesworth Parent Shaniqua Small Parent Coordinator Anselmo Hazel Field Support Center Staff Member Olga DeFilippis Other (Name and Title) type here C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 0 1 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 272 9 Total number of ELLs 19 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 6.99%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 1 0 0 3 0 0 2 0 0 4 0 0 K 0 0 0 0 0 0 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 5 0 0 6 0 0 7 0 0 8 0 0 9 0 0 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? We use Teachers College Literacy Assessment benchmark. We have seen that there is a trend with our students reading below benchmark that they need explicit instruction in decoding and encoding. We have decided to implement I-Ready and Ready Gen Phonics as interventions for this group, in addition to a multi-modality reading program for struggling readers. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? Teachers meet in grade level teams along with Ms. Buissereth to discuss the students level during complain planning time on Tuesdays. As a team, the teachers discuss strategies to support students and to monitor their growth over time. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? 0  We evaluate the success of our program in several ways. We first look at how many ELLs are exiting ESL service. We also evaluate our success with how our ELLs are doing on the state exams as well as regular performance-based assessments. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? Once the data has been gathered and analyzed, ESL teacher then meets with teachers and pushes into students classrooms in order to provide extra support for students. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] All teachers are involved in providing support to the ELLs. If a student is struggling, the ESL Teacher presents the case study of the student at the monthly SIT (student intervention team) meeting. The team discusses student work samples and documents the needs/concerns and a plan of action is developed for the ELL student. If the ELL student needs an additional support in a particular area of study, an academic plan specifying strategies to help the student is suggested and both the ESL and Intervention providers adhere to the Instructional plan and monitor progress. Depending on the needs/concerns of the student, other professionals may be invited to contribute to the plan and a parent conference is made with the ESL and classroom teacher. If the student is exhibiting physical difficulties or delays, and in need of speech, hearing service, or a learning disability, it is discussed with the parent as to what services may be needed to support the student. If there is a social-emotional need/concern, the child receives ‘at risk’ counseling in small groups and/or one-to-one, and progress is monitored. If the student continues to struggle and cannot perform on appropriate grade level, a parent conference is convened by the principal to discuss the concerns/needs of the ELL. Those invited to the conference may include classroom teacher, ESL service provider, and members of the SIT team and guidance counselor if necessary. Subsequently, if more support is needed and th parent is in agreement, a referral is generated to the SBST to follow up with the case. Based on the evaluation outcome, an EPC (Educational Planning Conference) is convened with the input from the parents, SBST, ESL and classroom/special education teachers. Parents are invited to discuss and share the plan and seek their consent to authorize the school to implement the plan in order to provide proper services to the ELL. If the parents agree, then the ELL is promptly, provided the necessary services by the appropriate provider as well as continuing with ESL services. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. The data patterns across performance levels on the NYSITELL and NYSESLAT revealed that students seem to score higher on listening and speaking compared to reading and writing across the grades. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? Our team meets 1x a month to discuss data and student progress over the year. As a team, we make adjustments, reflect and refine our interventions and schedule. Our program is adjusted periodically on a need be basis which is determined by the data. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. As of the current school year 2016-2017, our ENL program model will consist of two units of study per week for the entering level, two units of studies for the emerging level, one unit of study for the transitioning level, one unit of 1  study for the expanding level and former ELLs must continue to receive services for an additional two years. At P.S. 40 we have a Freestanding ESL Program with a total of 19 students receiving mandated services. The ultimate goal of this program is that students achieve cognitive academic language proficiency skills in order to fully benefit from academic English instruction without support. P.S.40 will implement Stand-Alone ENL in combination with integrated ENL. On some days the ESL teacher will pull out a group of students all on the same grade level, but heterogeneous in their levels of English proficiency, to work in small groups on specific skills. On other occasions, the ESL teacher will push into content area classes to see how students are progressing in other content areas. This is also an excellent way for the ESL teacher and classroom teachers to collaborate and use some ESL methodologies and instruction strategies in the content area classroom. Our school ESL teacher works collaboratively with the content area teachers to support ESL students. ESL teacher and classroom teachers meet regularly to plan and to discuss student’s academic strengths and weaknesses or to discuss progress they have made. Teachers also share effective strategies that they can implement with their students. b. TBE program. If applicable. N/A c. DL program. If applicable. N/A 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? In Stand-Alone ENL Model , the ESL teacher provides the mandated 360 minutes for Entering and Emerging and 180 minutes for Transitioning and Expanding Levels. Former ELLS continue to receive services for an additional two years. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. At P.S. 40 we have Stand-Alone ENL model. All content area instruction is delivered in English using ESL methodology. In content areas the students use Ready-Gen in ELA, Go-Math in mathematics, New York City Science by Harcourt School Publishers and New York City Social Studies by Houghton Mifflin Harcourt. Content areas instruction is delivered in English using ESL methodology and instructional strategies aligned with the Common Core State Standard . The ESL teacher also works in the Push-In model with the classes. At P.S. 40 we use the workshop model for instruction. Teachers are given professional development on how to develop lesson plans that include ELLs; language objective is an important component of every lesson plan. Teacher use many ESL supplemental materials in addition to ESL strategies to facilitate learning such as using manipulatives, expressive language, and total body response when delivering vocabulary instruction and/ or complex concepts to ELL students. Classroom instruction is also enhanced by visual, picture dictionary, implementing the arts, and constant verbal communication to ensure full understanding and grasp of the lesson. Instruction consists of a preview/review of vocabulary words, activating prior knowledge, mini-lesson, modeling, active engagement, guided practice, independent work, differentiated small group work, and a share. Classrooms are print-rich and classroom libraries have leveled books and genres such as: fiction, non-fiction, theme, multicultural, poetry, art, science, math, social studies. Students are encouraged to incorporate think-pair-share to promote speaking and listening skills, cooperative learning, and partner work throughout the day. ELLs are encouraged to respond in English or their native language. ESL teacher utilize native language support to make content comprehensible as needed. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? At this point, our ELL students are not assessed in their native language in content areas. Initially, if a new admit receives the LAB-R exam and they become entitled, they take the NYSITELL if they are a Spanish speaker. Our school presently has a free standing ESL program per parent choice which uses strategies for English Language development with native language support to help students develop language and content knowledge in English. 2  5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status Teachers at P.S.40 have received professional development on differentiating instruction and what differentiated instruction looks like. Teachers differentiate instruction not for only ELL's but for all students because of the mixed levels in just one classroom. Scaffolding and differentiation of instruction are necessary to assure success of all students. This requires a great deal of planning and often the ability of the teacher to provide a variety of materials at different levels to address the needs of all learners in the classroom. 6a. SIFE students are recommended for Academic Intervention Services. Our instructional program for SIFE students includes; materials and curriculum to strengthen literacy, mathematics, and technology skills. instructional plans would consist of context-embedded material and manipulatives and accelerated one-on-one instruction in English language development. 6b. Newcomer ELLs are provided with accelerated learning focused on literacy, English language development, and intensive ENL instruction and content area learning. We have a very dedicated staff that helps newcomers build on prior knowledge and to have a smooth transition into their new culture. We support newcomers through the use of bi-lingual books and materials in native language and translations when needed. Newcomers in our ENL programs are taught the basic literacy skills. They are instructed in phonics, decoding, vocabulary and targeted reading and writing skills. The ENL teacher collaborates with staff members to analyze and strengthen instructional strategies for scaffolding, utilizing appropriate materials, and connect to prior knowledge. 6c. Developing ELLs who have received services for a period of 4 to 6 years are identified as our target group. Our school provides interventions to develop academic language and vocabulary development, scaffolded instruction that integrates technology to enhance reading and writing skills. Technology in the classroom also provides motivation as well as access point to content. 6d. Long Term ELLs. 6e. Former ELLs who achieve proficiency on the NYSESLAT continue to receive services for an additional two years in ELN, ELA, and content areas. These students would continue to receive testing modifications for the 2 years following their proficient status. They are also encouraged to attend extended day or and other academic intervention programs provided by the school. The ESL teacher will also monitor progress reports of these students to make sure they are successful in their transition. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? Instructional materials are aligned with the Common Core State Standards and are age and grade level appropriate. We implement the workshop model and we receive professional development on various instructional strategies that can be utilized across content area classrooms. Scaffolding and differentiated instruction is one of the most useful ways to help students access difficult content. Our staff also utilizes the ELL website (OELL) for tools, resources, and professional development opportunities that can assist them in serving the specific needs of their ESL students. We make sure that the goals on the IEP are being met across the day through the use of collaborative planning between the ESL teacher and the IEP teachers. The ESL teachers have access to the IEP through SESIS, as well as identification of goals through the use of encounter attendance for their initial date of service. SWDs and ELLs are in the forefront of our planning. Through co-planning, we are able to share our differentiations to benefit all students. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? Teachers are reminded to consider giving ELL's and SWD's extended time by 50% to complete tasks. Teachers keep themselves fully informed of their students’ reading levels and interests so that they may guide their instruction to 3  compliment their students’ needs and strengths. ENL and ELA instruction use the balanced literacy model as well as Inquiry to provide the necessary language development to meet the needs of the individual students. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. Targeted interventions for ELLs in ELA and math are planned in close consultation with all teachers, including Academic Intervention providers and SETSS teacher involved in teaching ENL students. Content area picture dictionaries are used during small group instruction to address specific needs of each ELL to help them understand the concepts. The scaffolds applied to assist students are appropriate to their level of proficiency in the specific content area. In order to provide maximum possible support to ELLs, the ENL teacher pushes-into classes when ELA strategies, math, social studies and/or science are being taught. Based on the observation and the performance of ELL in the class work and periodic in-class assessment results, the students are provided extra help in the areas where they need remediation, whether it’s lack of understanding of academic language or their limited understanding of particular concepts in content areas. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? We would like to celebrate ELLs writing through publishing celebrations and exhibit and/or present our students' work to parents throughout the school year. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? None. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. All ELLs are afforded equal access to all curricular and extracurricular programs. ELLs are invitied to participate and encouraged to perform in academic and enrichment activities after school. All students including ELLs overwhelmingly sign up for a wide variety of activities where they get the opportunity to learn, share and acquire new skills, exhibit their talents and hone their skills in various areas. ESL students join all the educational trips and are among active members in various activities such as art, dance and after-school programs. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. Instructional materials and technology used to support ELLs include: computer aided instruction in ELA such as the I-Ready, and Go-Math, decoding/reading comprehension skills for new comers, new immigrants, and struggling readers, sight words, the letters of the alphabet, magnetic letter boards for practicing sight words; picture and photo cards to help understand words and concepts in science, math and social studies. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? At P.S.40, we only use the ENL model. Native language support is available in all classrooms through native language literature as well as content materials. P.S. 40 also facilitates the use of technology by the presence of laptops in the classroom. The ESL teacher is bilingual in French and conversant in Spanish and provides support to classroom teachers in the student’s native language as needed. ELLs are afforded easy access to dictionaries/thesaurus/picture and bilingual dictionaries. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. The materials include learning aids, technological tools used and texts which correspond to ELLs’ age and grade levels. The students are grouped homogeneously, appropriate to their age and grade level, so that they benefit from mutual interactions with their peers and feel comfortable to participate in all activities to promote language development. Picture dictionaries, bilingual vocabulary cards and picture cards are used to help beginner ELLs and new immigrants to grasp concepts in content areas. 4  15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? Instructional materials and technology used to support ELLs include: computer aided instruction in ELA such as the I-Ready, and Go-Math, decoding/reading comprehension skills for new comers, new immigrants, and struggling readers, sight words, the letters of the alphabet, magnatic letter boards for practicing sight words; picture and photo cards to help understand words and concepts in science, math and social studies. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). In order to assist newly enrolled ELL students at P.S. 40 in the beginning of the school year, we make every effort to make the parents and students feel welcome to the ESL program. These steps include: A. For those students new to the school, TPR is taught so that students can function and communicate their needs. B. In order to help them feel comfortable, the ESL teacher pushes-in to their classroom, introduces herself, and works side by side either individually or in small groups with new ELLs. Before the first day of school for students, we prepare our classrooms and the ESL room by labeling objects and making the classroom inviting. Administrators, teachers and the ESL teacher collaborate and share strategies and tips for welcoming Ells at our school. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? At P.S. 40 we do not offer language electives. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? We do not offer a Dual Language Program at PS 40. Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? All teachers including common branch, special education, subject area, related services participate in in-house and out of school professional development sessions. Teachers participate in professional development in the area of supporting ELLS by attending ENL workshops outside of the building. Weekly, Monday professional development specifically addresses how to integrate the Common Core State Standards and their related literacy tasks into our ELA curriculum and how to support ELLs as well as SWDs through differentiation of instruction. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. Grade 5 teachers visit middle schools with their students and our Guidance Counselor assists in the transition to middle school through workshops and one to one counseling for both parents and students. Our school offers a middle school information night for parents to help guide them through the application process and answer any questions or concerns they may have. The ENL teacher is there during the information night to provide parents with any assistance or to answer any questions they 5  may have about ENL programs in the middle school of their choice. Parent Coordinator Mr. Hazel assist parents filling out HS applications and answers any questions they may have. As of the current school year 2015-2016, the ENL teacher will continue to attend ELL specific professional development hosted by the DOE and the Borough Field Support Center and will continue to keep information on record. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? The school provides several curriculum nights where parents can attain both genereal and specific information regarding their ELL students. The answer for question two includes in person meetings, phone calls, monthly news letters, and specific letters to parents. Information is kept in the parent-outreach log and the ESL compliance binder. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Our administrators provide workshops to inform parents on the Common Core State Standards, and Test Prep. In addition, parents are invited to Parent Orientation, Curriculum Nights and Parent-Teacher Conferences. The ENL teacher and the parent coordinator hold meetings with parents of newly admitted ELLs to describe services, distribute the program preference surveys and introduce themselves to the parents with whom they maintain frequent contact. During Parent-Teacher conferences, the ENL teacher invites parents of ELLs to meet with them as well as classroom teachers to discuss ways to improve language development for newcomers and how to help ELLs acquire academic language in content areas. Guidance Counselor, ESL teacher and the parent coordinator are regularly available to consult and support with the parents of ELLs for middle school transition. We offer parent workshops, middle school visitations and assistance in filling out the choice forms to facilitate smooth transitioning for our graduating fifth graders. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Paste response here: 6 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Louise Antoine, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 7  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: PS 40 School DBN: 16K040 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Louise Antoine Title Principal Martha Smith Assistant Principal Anselmo Hazel Parent Coordinator Brigitte Buissereth ENL/Bilingual Teacher Shaniqua Small Parent Lorri Lee Kamelhar Teacher/Subject Area Una Cameronlee Teacher/Subject Area N/A Caterina Bondi (Speech) Coach Coach Sabrina Wadesworth School Counselor Rahesha Amon N/A N/A N/A N/A Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member N/A Other N/A Other N/A Other N/A Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 8  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 16K40 School Name: P.S.40 Superintendent: RaheshaAmon The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Bridgette Buissereth ENL teacher yes yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. We use the following data and methodologies: Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS), ATS reports, Student Emergency Contact Cards, and parent surveys conducted by our school to assess language preferences of the parent community for written and oral communication. We download written communications from the DOE webiside under ELLs (Parents Resources/Parent Information) draft and customize letters being sent home in the parents’ preferred language, such as Entitlement, Continued Entitlement, Non-Entitlement , Placement Letters, Parent Survey and Program Selection. We also use parent surveys to assess the needs of parents and how they can better support their children in school. These are made available in English and the preferred language to allow all parents participation in school wide assessment during open school nights. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. 9  Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Spanish Arabic Creole Fulani 32 9 2 3 10.7 3.01 .67 1 33 9 2 3 11.04 3.01 .67 1 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. Spanish Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to Families Sept-June Some of the documents our school typically disseminates every year that require translation are the following; PTA notification, School Leadership Team notification, School Dress Code notification, School/Grade News Letters, Parent-Teacher Conference announcements and School Based Support Team letters/notifications. Monthly Event Calendars Sept-June Monthly Newsletters Sept-June School Announcements Sept-June How do you plan to translate? Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. Translator from the DOE and in house translation Translator from the DOE and in house translation Translator from the DOE and in house translation Translator from the DOE and in house translation 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. 0  Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to September-June provide interpretation service(s)? In school staff, the Big Word consultants Formal face-to-face meetings our school has with parents throughout the school year include: Parent Orientation Meetings, Parent-Teacher conferences, Annual review IEP mandated meetings, SBST meetings/notifications, and personnel meetings with teachers, attendance teacher and/or guidance counselor in addition to administration. Parent-Teacher Conferences Sept,Nov., March, May Curriculum Night September, June School Leadership Team September-June In school staff, the Big Word consultants In school staff, the Big Word consultants In school staff, the Big Word consultants 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. In house staff members to translate, school messengers, translated versions of letters and flyers. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. We will share the information at the initial staff meeting in September and periodically throughout the year. Teachers are able to meet with in-house translators to support parents and use over the phone interpreters to assist in communicating with parents. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) Chancellor’s Regulation A-663, establishes the procedures of ensuring that Limited English Speaking parents are provided with a meaningful opportunity to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education. We have in-house translation and over the phone interpreters via the Translation and Interpretation Unit, services available through the DOE. The Chancellor’s requirement under A-663 regarding parental 1  notification and interpretation services, Parents Bill of Rights, interpretation notice signs and School Safety Plans are translated in parents native language and posted in the school lobby. The welcome poster is also displayed in the school lobby. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? Mechanisms used to gather parent feedback on the quality and availability of services will be based on information from parent surveys and checklists in addition to monthly meeting minutes from our Language Proficiency Team. 2 
