 16K081 School Name: P.S. 081 THADDEUS STEVENS Principal: CHERYL AULT- BAKER 2018-19 CEP-CS 1  Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC)   Section 1: School Information Page School Information School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Thaddeus Stevens 331600010081 3K-5 990 Dekalb Ave 718-574-2365 Phone Number: School Number (DBN): 16K081 718-919-9872 Fax: Cheryl Ault-Barker caultbarker@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Cheryl Ault-Barker Email Address: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Roy Marshall April King Roy Marshall Regina Curtis N/A na na District Information Geographical District: 16K RaheshaAmon Superintendent: 1010 Lafayette Avenue Room 135 Superintendent’s Office Address: Brooklyn, NY 11221 RAmon@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718-574-2834 Phone Number: 718-453-1048 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC)   Brooklyn North Bernadette Fitzgerald FSC: Executive Director’s Office Address: Executive Director: 131Livingston Street Bklyn, NY 11201 bFitzge2@schools.ny;c.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 7189353954 Phone Number: 7189352382 Fax:   Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Cheryl Ault-Barker 16K081 Roy Marshall 16k081 ZuleimaRosales Karen Henderson 16k081 N/A N/A CFKGreg Knight 16k081 16K081 Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/Parent Member/Parent Member Parent   ShakeilyaShaw 16K081 Wanda Hercules 16K081 CoreenThorn Claudine Bryant Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Member/Parent Member/Parent Member/ Teacher Member/ Teacher Member/ Teacher Member/ /Parent Member/ Parent Member/ CBO Member/   Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with   the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement   Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Mission Statement The staff of PS 81, in collaboration with our parent body, will prepare our students academically, socially, and culturally, by encouraging POSITIVE self -esteem, self-discipline, and self-determination. Everyone works toward the   shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for college and career success. All stakeholders demonstrate mutual respect. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. School Demographics Thaddeus Stevens Elementary School is located in the Bedford Stuyvesant section of Brooklyn, New York, a high poverty area serving over 291 students of which 51.2% are males and 48.8% are females. We have 56.6% Black or African American, 37.1% Hispanic or Latino, 2.7% Asian, 2.4% American Indian or Alaska Natives, 1% multiracial. Our diverse population includes 27.6% Students with Disabilities and 7% English Language Learners. 100% of our student body receive universal free lunch. Many of our students live either in single parent households, or with extended family, often being raised by a grandparent. We also serve 26.7% students in temporary housing from five locations (five shelters). Many of the shelter residence are victims of domestic violence. In order for our school to enhance student achievement, we have developed a community of trust among students, teachers and parents. Our overall parental engagement has doubled since they are now able to receive communication in their home language. Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and school. They participate in professional development activities and school celebrations around cultures. We have created a system where upper grade students read and support lower grade students one day a week. Parent volunteers//Learning Leaders are in the hallways during arrival, dismissal and class transitions to ensure that all students feel safe and transitions are seamless. Our instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Each classroom has a class president, and each student has an opportunity to choose an enrichment club each semester. As a Leader in Me School, students are a part of the lighthouse team and they are a part of the decision making for students. English Language Learners, Special Education Students and general education students are all exposed to rigorous instruction that is differentiated to meet their needs. Manipulative, visual aides and technology are used in every classroom to enhance learning and student involvement. Community Engagement Thaddeus Stevens School is a community school providing our students with a rigorous academic programs and we are proud of our students’ achievements and successes. Currently, we provide academic workshops for parents with Spanish translation, as well as a monthly Cook Shop coordinated by the parent coordinator, providing opportunities for parents to create nutritious, inexpensive meals for their families. We celebrate parents through quarterly honor roll assemblies, and attendance initiative. This is where we recognize parents for their partnership in their children’s education, and support of the school. We also host an annual parent-child breakfast, fathers-bring-your-child-to-school initiative, and parent trips. We encourage parent engagement through in-school events such as “Open Access Thursdays”, where we provide parents the opportunity to visit classrooms and observe the learning process, an annual back to school parent orientation night, parent teas held for each grade level and curriculum night, where parents are informed about the year's academic expectation for each grade level. Furthermore, we keep parents abreast of school events and initiatives through a variety of mediums including: monthly (printed Emailed) newsletters with a calendar of events, event advertisements, flyers, and postings on the school website and class DOJO. In an effort to encourage 0  engagement and partnership with the broader community, we open our annual school safety meeting to the public. Additionally, we actively recruit community members to be involved in school initiatives like our annual career day. Our school is currently in partnership with, and benefit from the support of several community organizations such as: Change for Kids, Family Dynamics, Grandparents Assistance Program, Parent Volunteers (Learning Leaders), The Leadership Program, Activity Works, Open Airways, Obesity Task Force, New York Cares, UFT Teacher Center, and Long Island University. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. Currently, PS 81 has five self-contained classes and six integrated collaborative team teaching classes. 27.6% of our student population are students with disabilities, which is 8% above the city average.. Most of the students need social emotional support, in terms of dealing with loses and accountability (accepting consequences for their behavior). We provide support to students who display hyperactivity, impulsiveness, inattentiveness, and combative behaviors. Students have a lack of understanding about boundaries and a lack of respect for authority. Students also have a problem processing language, in terms of non verbal cues/pragmatic skills and being able to follow directions. Some of our students have difficulty with memory retention, due to a lack of reinforcement outside of the instructional setting. Lastly, our students' families need to build their capacity to support students' academic and social emotional needs. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. This past year, we have seen improvement in collaboration among teachers, and trust. However, our area of focus for this school year will be to enhance a climate of inclusiveness, where students, staff and parents will take a more active role in the decision making process.We will also focus on improving rigorous instruction for student writing, critical thinking skills,and strengthening our collaborative approach to intervention. 1  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 16K081 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration PK,0K,01,02,03,04,05 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 299 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 45 45 15 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 23 18 15 15 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 91.0% % Attendance Rate 88.6% % Reduced Lunch 7.7% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 1.7% 30.8% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 0.7% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 15.37 0% 7% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 23.7% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 96% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A NO N/A NO NO Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A NO N/A NO NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A YES High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 38 39 15 86.8% 0.3% 33.4% 61.2% 4.7% 2.7% 0 4% 5 18.8% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No YES N/A N/A N/A NO NO N/A N/A N/A NO N/A N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Based on our most recent Quality Review data, 2017-2018 Superintendent's walk through and PPR feedback document, there is a need to develop greater consistency in our instructional tasks to include multiple entry points at high levels to address the instructional needs of all students, and support critical thinking for college and career readiness. Classroom observations revealed a need for higher order questions and discussions during instruction. After careful observation, our team has noticed that teachers need more training on data interpretation and utilization . With this in mind, teachers need to receive professional development around questioning, data interpretation, and using inquiry to disaggregated student and school wide data. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, the percentage of students in grades 3-5 who achieve a proficient score on the NYS assessment in Mathematics will increase by at least 5% over the level of proficiency from 2017-2018 school year. This will be measured by the NY State test in Mathematics and compared to June 2018 achievement. 3  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? NTN Mathematics Training provided to teachers in Grades 2-5 over the summer and throughout the school year. Teachers and Ed. Assistants 7-2018 to 6-2019 School leadership, Instructional Cabinet Instructional support provided by UFT Teacher Center Staff, Peer Collaborative Teachers, and Emerging Teacher Leaders. Teachers 9-2018 to 6-2019 School leadership, Instructional Cabinet Collaborative teacher team meetings consisting of inquiry cycles of learning, model lessons and looking at student work. UFT Teacher Center Professional Development Institutes, District 16 Instructional Support Team and Brooklyn Borough Field Office Support Team professional learning drawing on current research and best practices designed to deepen content knowledge and enhance teachers' pedagogical skills. Teachers, Ed. Assistants, and Administration 9-2018 to 6-2019 School leadership, Instructional Cabinet 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. We work with our community school director, community based organization lead, parent coordinator and staff to prepare a survey around student interest and also include academic programs before celebrations around students. Since our parents support student celebrations , we use this opportunity to teach and share. Curriculum nights and family nights are another forum to share and show rigor. Teachers continue to share information on class Dojo and school website. On our our last survey we received a 3.82 on rigor and we plan to exceed that result this school year. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Human resources necessary to achieve this goal include a full time UFT Teacher Center staff coach, 2 Peer Collaborative Teachers, a professional development team, and a Intervention Team . Supplemental instructional resources are needed to assist high needs and at-risk students to better understand and master the common core standards. We have developed and implemented a schedule of academic-intervention services for students who are identified as at-risk. 4  Per session funding for professional development purposes will be used to support, focused teacher engagement sessions around looking at and norming student work, as well as aligning assessments across the grades. Title III money will be used to support students in after school sessions designed around focused standards. Tax levy funding will be used to cover the cost of substitutes so teachers can meet during the day (2-3 times a year). Data days(3) will be added to the school calendar to support data collection and desegregation. Outside professional development will also be supported by the Brooklyn North Field Support Office. Peer Collaborative Teachers will work with teachers on lesson planning , Inquiry cycles of learning, and model lessons for teachers with a focus on writing instructional strategies. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy Title I SWP Title I TA X Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A C4E X 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind X Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. End of Year Benchmark By May 2019, 35% of students in grades 3-5 will demonstrate proficiency in both English Language Arts and Mathematics as measured by the CCLS Aligned Benchmark tests (Schoolnet), IReady, tasks and assessments that are aligned with the common core standards. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) CCLS Aligned Benchmark test (Schoolnet), Running Records, IReady, Baseline assessments, formative and summative assessments, teacher created 6 week assessments and unit tests Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 5  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? Current data, which includes NYS achievement scores, MOSL’s, and school benchmark assessments, findings from our Quality Review and Principals PPO indicates the need to make the items listed below priorities for the 2018-2019 school year :  To increase the number of students who are proficient in ELA (Currently at 35%)  To increase the number of students who are proficient in mathematics (Currently at 30%)  To increase the proficiency level of students with disabilities and English as a New Language  To provide all teachers, including educational assistants with professional development in the implementation of the common core curriculum;  To provide all students with multiple opportunities for achievement and success in all areas  To provide specially designed instructions for staff members around their problem of practice and pedagogy According to the 2016-17 Quality review findings and 2017-2018 PPR by the superintendent, The school leader communicates high expectations regarding professionalism and instruction connected to the Danielson Framework for Teaching to the entire staff. The school leaders and staff consistently communicate high expectations for all students to families. Impact School leaders have a system of accountability for these expectations and staff provides ongoing feedback to families to help them understand student progress toward those expectations. Supporting Evidence  The principal provides a weekly newsletter to staff regarding expectations. For example, the November 12 newsletter had the following reminders regarding school-wide expectations for every classroom: Differentiated instruction in the classroom, (k-2) students will read at home for one hour a night, (3-5) must read at least 2 hours, recording of students’ reading levels by teachers, implement and monitor the tracking of student goals, use of data binders to track student progress, lesson plans with all components of an effective lesson, and learning targets visible for all students.  The school communicates with the parents via special assemblies, Parent Teacher Association meetings, emails, phone calls and designated weekly times for parents to come in, and workshops. Examples of parent workshop topics include educating parents on ELA and math testing, which helps to familiarize parents with standards and how to support their children academically at home, and Learning Leaders Training, which are a series of workshops to equip families of pre-kindergarten through grade 5 students with information and strategies to help them succeed academically and reinforce the Common Core Learning Standards at home.  The school partnered with Change for Kids, an organization that works with elementary schools to engage students in academic achievement and developing 21st Century skills such as creativity, communication, collaboration and critical thinking.  Parents are consistently provided with their child’s progress via progress reports, conferences, letters and ClassDojo, an online system that allows for quick, in the moment parent engagement by providing parents immediate messages regarding their child’s performance. Based on teachers' observation, measure of teacher practice and measure of student learning, teachers will receive differentiated professional development to improve or enhance their practice. Part 2 – Annual Goal 6  Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, school wide attendance will increase by at least 2% from 91 % to 93% as evidenced by ATS attendance reports compared to June 2017 ATS Attendance data. 7 Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All students includes Tier I, II and III Sept 2018-June 2019 Attendance Team Classroom Teachers Students shows a pattern of 4 or more absences in a month parents Sept-2018 -June 2019 Parent Coordinator, Attendance Teacher, Family Worker Sept.-2018- June 2019 Gregory Knight, Parent Coordinator, School Counselor all students Sept.2018- June 2019 Attendance Team Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Attendance Awareness Parent Outreach CBO (Change for Kids) will conduct quarterly workshops for parents, and provide resources for support. Attendance team will meet bi-monthly to discuss current strategies and improvements that need to be made. Attendance team will implement incentives for classes who have the highest attendance percentage each month. Students who are habitual late comers will have to be escorted in the building by a parent or adult and see the attendance teacher or guidance counselor before going to class. Letters will be sent home to parents and this information is also included in the Parent handbook. Monthly Student Recognition events for students showing improvement in attendance. Attendance self monitoring recording sheets that allows students to monitor their attendance daily. Parents will be required to sign attendance monitoring sheets . 3b – Parent and Family Engagement 8  How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. The school will conduct quarterly workshops for parents in order to provide them with strategies to support their children at home. The attendance team, guidance counselor, family worker and parent coordinator, will be responsible for implementing this plan. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. (CBO) Change for Kids will conduct quarterly workshops   Parent Coordinator contact parents of students who are habitual absentees.  PTA will collaborate to provide incentives to parents whose children's attendance have increased Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E X Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal.  By February 2019, the attendance team will have identified students who showed a pattern of chronic absences and would have implemented strategies and interventions to improve students attendance.  By October 2018 all students will use self monitoring to track their attendance.  By December 2018 the attendance team will meet with Administration to provide feedback on achievement of attendance goals.  By March 2019 the attendance team will meet with Administration to provide feedback on achievement of attendance goals.  By June 2019 the attendance team will meet with Administration to provide feedback on achievement of attendance goals. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress.  The Attendance team will evaluate the cumulative absence, chronic student attendance and school attendance reports as measured by the ATS attendance reports. Attendance outreach records will be reviewed daily. Students' self monitoring sheets, Parent Engagement logs, Workshop attendance sheets,  Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 9  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Based on the 2017-18 Quality Review and 2017-2018 Superintendent's PPR feedback: Teachers are engaged in structured inquiry-based professional collaborations that promote the achievement of school goals and the implementation of The Learning Standards. However, they need to take the work to the next level. and dig deeper to make students thinking visible. Teacher teams consistently meet and analyze assessment data and student work for students. Professional collaborations result in strengthening the instructional capacity of teachers and in progress towards goals for students. Based on the following data from our school report card, NYC School Survey .... Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June of 2019, at least 100% of teachers will actively participate in at least 3 professional learning cycles which will result in the teaching staff collaboratively designing and engaging in weekly planning and inquiry meeting to review and revise lesson and unit plans that improve teacher practice by 5% as measured by MOTP in domain 1. 0  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Two professional periods per week will be scheduled into each teachers program for common planning and collaborative inquiry. all teachers 9-2018 to 6-2019 Tuesdays professional development/ Collaborative Inquiry time will be used to look at students work to ensure alignment to the curriculum all teachers 9-2018 to 6-2019 Teacher Leaders, School Administration Teacher Leaders, School Administration NA NA 3b – Parent and Family Engagement NA NA NA NA NA NA How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Teacher center coach, parent coordinator and all staff will meet with parents on Tuesdays. Grades pre-K through grades 2, parents will pick students up in the classroom and teachers will use this time to share curriculum, calendars, and also give support to parents on how to help their children at home. The upper grades 3-5 will make appointments to meet parents and continue to document and log all support or conversations. We will reach out to the Adult Education to continue the GED program for parents who are learning English Language. UFT teacher center personnel, Asst. Principal, Parent coordinator and all staff. We have included professional development for our ELL parents, for our Special needs students and curriculum nights for all students. During curriculum nights, teachers will work as a grade team to help parents understand the content and also allow them to see that they work collaboratively. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. To address the needs of all learners, ELLs, students with disabilities, students in temporary housing and all students, we will have small group instruction period 5 and all staff will be involved in this activity. Great Leaps will be used for fluency, Wilson's and Foundations along with Max Scholar and Head Sprout based on the needs of each student. On Tuesdays we will have student celebrations and invite parents to celebrate student work and have student present to parents. Per session will be paid to teachers to work with students during the extended day to support, and enhance the work. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. 1  X Tax Levy C4E X X Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February of 2019, at least 80% of teachers will use systems that have been implemented to effectively use data to drive instruction and improve student outcomes. The impact of this will be at least a 3% increase in Math scores in diagnostics exams This will be compared to the September 2018 baseline assessment data. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. We will use the baseline assessment and bi annual assessment along with our six weeks assessments. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. According to the 2017-2018 Quality Review and 2017-2018 PPR feedback document Across classrooms, teaching practices are aligned to the curricula and reflect an articulated set of beliefs about how students learn best that is informed by the Danielson Framework for Teaching. Across classrooms, teaching strategies consistently provide multiple entry points into the curricula. Impact Teachers’ pedagogical practices across classrooms engage students in appropriately challenging tasks; Students need to have more opportunities with the necessary scaffolds and/or extensions to create more opportunities for student engagement. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019 there will be at least a 3% increase in teachers rating in Danielson component/rubric "3C - Engaging students in Learning" as shown in Advance and compared to results from June 2018 in the Advance system. 3  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? classroom inter-visitation, low inference observations and feedback all teachers September 15th 2016 Coaches, principal Model Classrooms, Peer Collaborative teacher support all teachers 9-2018 to 6-2019 Coaches, Instructional Leaders na na 3b – Parent and Family Engagement NA NA NA NA NA NA How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. The teachers, parent coordinator and PTA will reach out to parents to become class room parent leaders and also encourage them to be trained as learning leaders. They will be trained on leadership techniques and strategies and how it affects student. In other words, when parents support their children at home, student achievement increases. They in turn will talk about their growth and leadership styles then we will be able to share the essentials of successful leadership. (How leadership can be a part of their lives, family etc. and how they can refine their own leadership skills. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Peer Collaborative Teacher, Model teacher, Field Support Center Professional Development, UFT Teacher Center Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E X X Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA X Title II, Part A SIG PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 4  By February 2019 there will be at least a 2% increase in teachers rating in Danielson component/rubric "3C - Engaging students in Learning" as shown in Advance and compared to results from February 2016 in the Advance system. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. As measured by state baseline assessments, formative assessments and six weeks assessments. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 5  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. According to the 2017-18 School Survey we have a 91% satisfaction rate by parent with the school. We have leveraged our relationships by developing activitie3s that involve both the parent and child as part of the experience. We have trainings for parents of ELLs and SWDs on how to best support their children. We plan on utilizing our relationship structure with families to further increase parental involvement in the school for all children. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, we will increase parent engagement at least 15%, through parent participation in academic centered activities as compared to parent participation rates in similar events from the 2017-18 academic school year. 6  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Parent workshops focused on SWD, and ELL’s All Parents October2018 Guardians January2019 Coaches, Grade Leader, Parent Lighthouse Team, Classroom Parents Curriculum Night Title I All Parents Guardians All Parents Guardians Parent Workshops for Testing Grades (3-5) Parent Workshops for Science Projects (K-5) Parent Workshops for Science State Exam (4th Grade) Parents in Grades( 2-5) December 2018 April 2019 3b – Parent and Family Engagement September 2018 Teachers, Administration, November 2018 Parent Coordinator, PTA, Teacher, Coaches, Science Department Chair, If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. Change for Kids, Family Dynamics, Inspire Corps Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc.  Teachers will participate in Curriculum night and inform parents of the various curriculum's students will be engaged in.  Grades 3-5 parents will participate in workshops presented by coaches and teachers. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Title I TA Title II, Part A SIG X PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other 7  Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By December 2018 -June 2019 we will increase parent engagement by at least a 15% increase in parent/child celebrations, parent leadership workshops, academic workshops and the Leader In Me. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Sign in sheets and volunteering hours in classrooms or in school activities Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 8  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Leveled books, close reading, interactive writing, Small Group Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Mathematics Science Social Studies Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Baseline Assessment Baseline Assessment Baseline Assessment Baseline Assessment At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) I ready, Performance Task, Dibbles, Unit Tests,Leaderin me, Restorative Circles During School day, after school During School day, after school During School day During School day, after school Small Groups Small Groups Small Groups Push in- Pull out programs, Non fictionLiterature,BubblesCBO Non fictionLiterature,ProjectBased Learning PBISprogram, interactive writing, reading, accountabletalk Small Groups During School day, after school 9  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) We currently have over 87 students in temporary housing 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. We plan to have them participate in our Leader in Me Program, Family dynamics and 21st Century. They will also meet with our guidance counselor and mentors once a week. Not only will students' needs be addressed but workshops will be provided to help parents with coping skills and resilience. Teachers will continue to reach out to parents on Tuesdays. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). NA 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 0  Provide uniforms, school supplies, money for trips, health and hygiene packages. 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. We received funding for our students in temporary housing. 1  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. Teachers are encouraged to develop and become mentors, peer evaluators or administrators. They are given the opportunities to practice in and out side of our school building. They present workshops at varying events including the Chancellor's Conference. They are a part of voice and governance in the school. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). Attend NYCDOE Professional Learning Opportunities, have a teacher Center where information and skills that were learned are turned keyed to other teachers. Study Groups and School Administration facilitates Professional Developments. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. NA 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). NA 2  Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). Parental Seminars for 3K and Pre-K parents, donate book to parents to prepare children for transition into the 3K to Pre-Kindergarten programs and Pre-K to Kindergarten programs. Class Dojo is a mobile interactive tablet/ cell phone app which keeps parents informed with the child's progress throughout the day. 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. During my one to one meeting with teachers and teacher teams we discuss and look at the assessments being used and assess the validity. Teachers will share about the authenticity of the results based on their observations in class. If there is a great discrepancy, then a team will look into the test and results and together agree to pilot another assessment that the team recommends. Again, teams will reconvene and decide on assessment tool to be used. Instructional team will verify and then endorse . 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 268,608.00 34,655.00 0 0 1,748,787.00 X X X X X Column B Section Reference(s) 5B, 5A, 6 5A NA NA 5A, 5B 3  1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated: 4   Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 5  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. PS 81 Thaddeus Stevens School, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students PS 81 Thaddeus Stevens School will support parents and families of Title I students by: ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; 6  ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; The school’s Parent Involvement Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; 7  ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the ESSA; ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) School-Parent Compact (SPC) PS 81 Thaddeus Stevens School, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student 8  achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; 9  ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; 0  II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; 1  ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 2  Addendum: Community School Partnerships Directions: The Community School (CS) strategy is directly aligned to the Framework for Great Schools. Community Schools bring schools and community partners together and integrate academics, health, youth development, and family engagement to provide students with the tools and opportunities they need to succeed. The Core Services in Community Schools are Expanded Learning Time (ELT), Attendance Supports, Family Engagement, and Health & Wellness. Part 1 – Community School Partnerships Goal(s) How is the CS strategy integrated into academic instruction at your school, and what impact has it had on student academic outcomes? Beginning September 2018, the community school partnership will provide an after-school instructional program in ELA and Mathematics for grades 3 - 5, which is funded through a 21st Century grant. Per-Session teachers will bridge curriculum from the school day into after school, using iReady. We also will be providing other 21st Century funded after school (such as arts and sports enrichment) through The Leadership Program, which has built-in Homework Help for 45 minutes. Since this is the first year of the program, we are aiming for an increase by 3% in student academic achievement in ELA and Mathematics test scores. Indicate the summative goal(s) of the Community School for the 2018-19 school year. Be sure to construct the goal to be SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Realistic, and Time-bound. By the end of June 2019, at least 80% of students in grades 3-5 will participate in academic intervention, and arts & sports enrichment during the after-school program. Students will receive a minimum of 30 hours of after school instruction, with a goal of 90 hours by June 2019. On Mondays, Tuesdays, and Fridays, we will be providing 21st Century-funded arts and sports enrichment programs, such as Theatre, Dance, Singing, and Basketball. On Wednesdays and Thursdays, we have per-session teachers facilitating academic intervention in Math and ELA. Students will receive pre and post assessments to measure growth. By June 2019, attendance will increase by a minimum of 2% to 91%. Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Community School Annual Goal(s): How will achieving your Community School Goal(s)--in Expanded Learning Time (ELT), Attendance Supports, Family Engagement, and Health & Wellness--support your academic goals for students? By achieving our Community School Goals, we hope to see in increase by 5% in Math and ELA test scores. Part 2 – Community School Partnerships Core Services Action Plan Part 2a. Identify the Community-based Organization (CBO) partnerships that you will develop in ELT, Attendance Supports, Family Engagement, and Health & Wellness, their target student population(s), and scope of the services provided. As well as supporting schools’ supportive environment and attendance work, CBOs should be helping to support your school’s instructional focus. CBO Partnership Target Population Scope of Service SY18-19 SMART Goal The Leadership Program 3rd-5th grades 3rd-5th grades By June 2019, 80% of 3rd, 4th and 5th grades will receive after-school academic intervention, and arts and sports enrichment, at a minimum of 30 hours 3  Change for Kids All grades Bubbles Foundation All grades Family Dynamics K-5 total with a goal of 90 hours or more. Outdoor garden will be used at least 8 times by EOY, by multiple staff and outdoor garden maintenance assigned to and completed by school staff or parents by EOY. Bubble curriculum will be taught at least 5 times to some students by June 2018. At least 2 staff engagement events by EOY. Healthy Food Policy will be consistently enforced by December 2018. Wellness Committee will meet at least 6 times before EOY. By June 2019, Family Dynamics will provide after school care for 100 students. In-class science programs, in-class music programs In-class healthy eating and cooking instruction, school garden After school program, provides care when school is not in session Part 3 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 3a. Indicate resources your Community Partnership will leverage to achieve your summative SMART goal(s) and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. The Community School Director will be working with the following CBO's to achieve our summative SMART goals:  The Leadership Program  Change for Kids  The Bubble Foundation  Family Dynamics We will also be partnering with our Mental Health Consultant, school Social Worker, two School Psychologists, and Guidance Counselor on our Health and Wellness goals. We also have an attendance team in place which meets weekly to reach our summative SMART goals, which consists of the Principal, Assistant Principal, Community School Director, the Attendance Teacher, the AIDP, the school Guidance Counselor, and all school aids. We are working on an incentive program for after school, where students will receive prizes based on how many hours of enrichment/intervention they accumulate during after school. We hope this will help achieve our summative SMART goal for ELT, as well as increase our overall attendance rate for the school. 4  Part 3b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) Title I SWP Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside X 21st Century C4E SIG Grant School Achievement X Other Funding Part 3c. Describe how the school will partner with the Lead CBO to do the following: 1. Community Schools are expected to partner with a community-based partner organization (CBO) and together with members of the School Leadership Team, hire a Community School Director. The Director will lead implementation of the asset and needs assessment process, and other critically important coordinating activities. Indicate how you will leverage this aspect of the work. Community Schools are expected to personalize the needs of all students, through strategic programming and services, as determined by the asset and needs assessment, and must also offer Expanded Learning Time (ELT) and mental health programming. In completing this section, ensure that you think about how: (1) the right services are provided to the right students and families at the right time; and (2) how you will seamlessly coordinate services with instructional programming happening throughout and outside of the school day. Indicate how you will implement this work, and describe other programming you anticipate to be in place to strengthen this initiative. Community Schools are expected to emerge as Partnership Schools, which are places where parents and families feel welcome, actively participate in the conversation and decision-making around the renewal of their schools, and have many opportunities to advocate for their children. Monthly meetings and Community School Forums engaging families and community stakeholders will be a critical part of this family engagement strategy. Describe how you will implement this aspect of the work. Community School Principals are expected to meet on a weekly basis with their Community School Director, select Assistant Principals, key staff, and other CBOs, to analyze trends in data and case manage individual students. Data tools – including the New Visions Data Sorter - and training will be available for schools to use. Indicate how you will implement this aspect of the work. 2. 3. 4. 1. Our Community School is partnered with The Leadership Program, funded through a 21st CCLC grant. Our part-time Community School Director is currently in the process of a needs assessment. 2. Before we started our after school programming, the Community School Director did a survey of all 3rd, 4th, and 5th graders to assess their interests. The CSD has been using this information, along with the Principal's overall vision, to create an after school program that addresses all the needs of the student body and the school. Since we have per-session teachers doing academic intervention twice a week, they are already aware of instructional programming, and are able to bridge school day curriculum and lessons into after school. Our professional Teaching Artists from The Leadership Program will have several meetings throughout the year with the Principal and the Community School Director to ensure that their goals and programming are aligned with the instructional goals and programming. 3. Working closely with the Parent Coordinator and PTA, the Community School Director will be setting up more engaging ways to get feedback from parents. Currently, PS 81 has monthly surveys that are given to parents to receive feedback on workshops, programming, school climate, etc. The Parent Coordinator also has one-on-one meetings with parents and stakeholders on an ongoing basis. The Community School Director, PTA, and Parent Coordinator will start working on a system to set-up monthly Community School Forums, where parents and stakeholders can engage in important conversations regarding the community and the school. 5  4. The Community School Director and Principal would like to use the New Visions Data Sorter to analyze data, and will set up a training for that. The CSD and Principal are currently setting up a date and time that is best for weekly meetings. Part 4 – Community School Partnerships Oversight Part 4a. Key Staff and Partners 1. Name and describe the scope of involvement of all community partners working in the school (include partners supporting ELT, counseling, enrichment, etc.) 2. Name the members of your Community School Team and how meetings will be organized and structured to engage all stakeholders and be focused on results. 3. Explain data strategies including the use of the data sorter, and steps that the school will take to ensure that the appropriate interventions are provided to the right students 1. We have two community partners who support ELT: Family Dynamics and The Leadership Program. Family Dynamics will be focusing on providing ELT for K-2, while The Leadership Program will be focusing on grades 3-5. Family Dynamics also provides care for times that school is not in session. The Leadership Program provides top Teaching Artists to teach in their field, including theatre, dance, and music. Both programs begin immediately after the school day ends, and continue until 5:30pm or 6:00pm. While our Community School grant does not provide funding for Mental Health, we do have a Mental Health Consultant, two School Psychologists, and a Social Worker who work at the school, who work with the Community School Director, Principal, Assistant Principal, and Guidance Counselor to determine the needs of individual students, as well as the needs of the entire school. We also work with the Bubbles Foundation, who provides a community garden, healthy cooking lessons for students (and parents), as well as a Healthy Food Policy for the entire school. Change for Kids provides support for Social/Emotional Needs, in-class music enrichment with 3rd St. Music, as well as in-class science support. 2. Since this is our first year as a Community School, we are currently assembling our Community School Team. So far, this team will consist of the School Leadership Team members, including the Community School Director, PTA members, teachers, and the Parent Coordinator. The team will also consist of our Student Ambassadors, as well as members of the community around the school. Meetings will be organized by the Community School Director. 3. We would like to use the New Visions Data Sorter to help us ensure we are meeting individual needs of each student, and will set up a training time for that tool. Our attendance team is also analyzing attendance data weekly to determine which students are at-risk or currently are chronically absent, and are using this to implement Success Mentors for attendance. Change for Kids will be providing a Social/Emotional assessment for our students, which we will then use to implement programming, etc. into the school day and after school. Part 4b. Indicate resources needed including human resources, instructional resources, and schedule adjustments to implement the Community School program. Under the 21st CCLC grant, PS 81 was not given any budget for Health and Wellness. PS 81 has a Mental Health Consultant, but the school is in need of more resources for Health and Wellness, which would help the school establish more consistent mental health care for the students, or possibly set up an on-site Mental Health Clinic. Part 4c. Timeline for implementation and completion, including start and end dates. Our timeline is 30 weeks for all after school programming - starting October 2, 2018 and ending May 25, 2019. All other CBO activities - including Change for Kids and Bubbles Foundation activities - are on-going throughout the year, ending in June 2019. Part 4d. Mental Health Work Plan Separate from this S/CEP, schools will complete a Mental Health Work Plan that will become an addendum to this document. 6  7  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 16 School Name The Thaddeus Stevens Elementary School Borough Brooklyn School Number 81 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Cheryl Ault-Barker Coach Kathy Polight ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Hsiu-Na Wang Teacher/Subject Area Cicely Lewis Teacher/Subject Area N/A Related-Service Provider Savina Hentry Superintendent Rahesha Amon-Harris Assistant Principal Michele Goudy Coach Michele Mavrovouniotis School Counselor Timisha Hqarvell Parent April King Parent Coordinator Judith Daniels Field Support Center Staff Member N/A Other (Name and Title) N/A C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 0 1 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 287 8 Total number of ELLs 20 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 6.97%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): N/A If yes, indicate language(s): N/A Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Lang. N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 3 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 4 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 2 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 5 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 6 0 7 0 8 0 9 0 10 11 12 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? Our school uses Fountas & Pinnell and CKLA (Core Knowledge Language Art) to assess the early literacy skills of our ELLS. Fountas & Pinnell provides a framework for evaluating students reading ability. CKLA assesses students' reading and writing skills. As of October 2016, the Fountas and Pinnell Reading Level data shows that most of our ELL students are reading below grade level. The implication for this year's LAP is to utilize data from the assessments in order to focus instruction in the ENL program and in classroom with ELLS towards raising performance levels in reading to grade level or above fo all ELLS. Fountas and Pinnell data is used by the ENL teacher and classroom teachers to inform both push-in and pull-out instruction, plan groupings (ex: Guided reading groups), identify the individual early literacy skills in need of improvement for each student, and target interventions for at-risk ELLS. Progress monitoring by the ELLS and classroom teacher's is an on-going process, documenting strategies and interventions utilized and their efforts on student performance. Data is shared among the administration, instructional team members and colleagues at conferences a means to inform the school's instructional plan. The CKLA is broken into two strands-a skill strand and a listening & learning strand. It assesses students on sounds and 9  letters recognition, decoding and encoding skills. Teachers can also utilize the Assessment and Remediation Guide for instruction intended to re-teach and reinforce objectives not mastered from the skill strands. Students results will be analyzed using a variety diagnostic reports produced for individual students and for groups of students. It generates instant reports aligned to Common Core Standards to help teachers move quickly from assessment to instruction and helps administrators identify resource needs. We used the data from the report to pinpoint skill gaps, group students for differentiation, plan instructional next steps and communicate with parents. In addition, coaches can use the data to plan pull out sessions and provide additional resources. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? Professional Development will provide teachers different scaffolds and strategies that help ELL students succeed in their class. In addition, the CALLA (Cognitive Academic Language Learning Approach) and other ENL methodologies will be introduced in the professional development program. Some of the other professional development includes information on how to prepare ELL students for the ELA, Math, Science and social Studies, differentiated instruction, promotional policies for the ENL students. Other topics are as follows: Using Data to Raise Student Achievement, Writing Across Curriculum, Student Center Coaching, Strategies for ELLs, Developing and Using Math Center, Integrated Collaborative Teaching. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? At PS 81, the school leadership and teachers use the Analysis Report of ELL periodic Assessment which indicates how students did, both individually and as a group (across a class, school, or network) to analyze which particular skill areas each students is struggling with, as well as which skills are he/she excels. These indicators can be used to consider what instructional next step should be taken to give students additional and effective support. Administrators, the Instructional Team and teachers can use the results of the ELL Periodic Assessment to predict how well students will do on future city-wide exams. The results can be used as a guide for instruction and grouping as well as a resource. We also use the assessment of NYCPT (New York City Performance Task)s at the beginning, middle and the end of school year to identify baseline, progress and areas of need. Teachers use these assessments along with other school work and what they see in class to learn where students need more help and plan target instruction. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? Our school uses MaxScholar reading Intervention programs to help students who are struggling to read. We use the summative data to identify students who are struggling to read and assign teachers to provide interventions for these students of each grade. Students will be pulled out during period 1 and period 8 from Monday to Friday. This on-line reading program provides the students a comprehensive reading experience. It's designed with visual, auditory and tactile activities and games. aside from the basic phonics and spelling instruction, reading cover music, biographies and geography. Teachers can also get the reports and data from administrative site to monitor students 'learning progress. It also provides professional development to train teachers in the Orton-Gillingham and Lindamood Bell method. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] Our school will use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention framework: 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. Our school will use the NYSELAT assessment data to evaluate and inform our ELL program. We will download the RESI ,RNMR, and RLAT reports from ATS and enter the data in the ELL Data Analysis Tool. The data yielded from ELL Data Analysis Tool will be used to focus on the progress toward achievement of proficiency for specific subgroups of ELLs and the design of effective instructional program and intervention for those students. We will also track the factors that have been shown to lead to risk of lower academic achievement so we can tailor and target intervention for at risk students before reaching a more critical level. The ENL teacher can use the data to measure progress toward the goal of English proficiency of each ELLs. 0  7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? In order to prepare ELL students to improve the ELA test, Reading Express is used to support ELL students. Reading Express is a complete resource kit for helping teachers meet the specific standards-based reading needs of the students in grade 3, 4, and 5. The lessons begin with teacher modeling followed by shared reading, guided reading and applying as the degree of control gradually shifts from the teacher to the students. Each grade level contains approximately 60 lessons. Each lesson is focused on a particular reading skill. The kit includes Teacher’s Guide, Teacher support binder, and Assessment Resource with Exam software, ELL resource, and Teacher Too kid CD. Differentiated instruction is an integral part of the daily instruction for students To prepare ELL students for the State-wide Math test, the Language of Math is also used to support ELL students in enhancing their math skills. This program is developed especially for ELL students, teaching the essential academic language of the math curriculum. It includes the Student learning System, and the Teacher Toolkit. The Student Learning System includes Students Work Text and Student Vocabulary Cards. The Teacher toolkit includes Student Worksheets, Teacher Transparencies, Teacher CD-Rom, Assessment handbook, and ELL Best Practice Audio CD. The workshop model is used in instruction, and content is differentiated for students at varying levels. In order to improve students engagement, increase academic achievement and make our school more globally competitive, each classroom is equipped with Smart Boards. This new technology accommodates different learning styles : Tactical ELL learner can use the screen and learn by touching and marking at the board. Audio ELL learners can have a discussion. Visual ELL learners can observe the teaching on the board. Most importantly, all forms of media-videos, photographs, graphs, maps,illustrations, games, etc-can be used on the board, making it incredibly dynamic in nature. This expands the range of content that teachers can use for teaching or presenting new information. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. In order to meet the linguistic needs of our ELLs, parental choices and Part-154 mandates, PS 81 language allocation policy will be as follows: The ESL program follows the push -in and pull-out model. ELL students will be grouped according to their grade and their level of language proficiency in NYSITELL and NYSESLAT tests. The RNMR (NYSESLAT combined Modality Report) and RLAT (LAB-R, NYSESLAT Exam History Report) indicate the proficiency level of each student from different grade in the areas of listening/speaking and reading /writing. This report allows the ENL teacher to place the students in the appropriate group and setting. Students are grouped for instruction based on their proficiency levels and grade levels. This means that some students receive instructions in groups on grade level as well as cross-grade level. Students who are at Entering and Emerging levels will be pulled out by a certified ENL teacher and receive one unit of study in Integrated ENL/ELA instruction to develop English language skill so that they can succeed in core content courses. Students at the entering level will also receive Stand-Alone ENL 180 minutes per week; while students at the emerging level will also receive Stand-Alone ENL 90 minutes per week. However, students at the transitional and expanding levels will be in a Push-in model class where the ENL teacher works with ELLs in collaboration with general education classroom teacher to provide language acquisition and vocabulary support. They will receive Integrated ENL instruction 180 minutes per week. Former ELLS will receive 90 minute- per- week of Integrated ENL in ELA/Core Content Area instruction for two additional years. Due to no BIL/DL program in our school, the Native Language and Subjects (Science/ Math/Social Studies are not taught in the 1  native language). However, ENL program has native language support in the classroom. There are bilingual books in the class library. During the Silent Reading Period (about 15 minutes every day), students are encouraged to read the literature in their native language. For the beginners of English proficiency, they are encouraged to read 100%-70% of the books in their language. For the intermediate students, they are encourage to read 50% of the book in their native language, while for the advanced students, they are encouraged to read 25% of the books in their native language. Math text books in Spanish are also used by the Spanish speaking new comers during the instruction in the class. The ENL teacher integrate ENL in the content area (Math, Science, and Social Studies) in the thematic learning activities. Graphic organizers, posters, CD, computers and literature books related to the subject area are used during the activities. Students work through each unit, which will enable them to master both language and the concept. Various methodologies and approaches will be used to meet the language needs of English Language Learners. These approaches are as follows: • The Language Experience Approach helps students learn to develop all of the four language skills- listening, speaking, reading, and writing- from story telling, story writing, and story acting. • Cooperative Learning- Students participate in different activities, like role playing, and grouping, which enable them to develop not only academic skills for cognitive development, but also social cooperative and critical thinking skills. They have assigned roles when working on groups. • Total Physical Response- This approach creates an environment relatively free of anxiety, in which students will show comprehension through action, and students will speak when they are ready. • Hands on Activities- Students will have the opportunity to do scientific experiments, which will enable them to better understand concepts. They will also work on projects which involve construction and design. • Classroom Technical Support-The classroom has four computers, a large television monitor connected to the computer. Students are given the opportunity incorporate the classroom computers into many of their learning activities. Programs like Power Point will be used to enhance students’ creativity. Students have access to the Internet so that they can research classroom projects. Students can also use a variety of CD-ROM programs to enhance their content area learning. Audio tapes and videotapes are also used to expand the students learning experience. In an effort to raise learning standards, the ENL teacher uses a variety of literature, new readers, workbooks, word walls with pictures, audio cassettes, realia, manipulative and strategy charts related to current units of study to allow concepts to be taught in concrete. These students also have access to a multicultural library in the classroom, where they can check out books and read them at home. These books are ranged from levels K-5. This library also provides newly arrived ELL students, with bilingual books (English/Spanish/Chinese). Each student also has his or her own homework folders, in which they keep their reading logs and journal notebooks. Students take home at least one book every day. They either write a response to their reading or write about anything they like to express, i.e. short stories, poems, and daily incidents. Students can also use books with cassettes in the listening center to enhance their listening and reading skills. In addition, ELLs also have the access to interactive leveled e-Books from Raz-Kids web-site. Every leveled -e-Book has an accompanying e-Quiz to test reading Comprehension. They can practice reading anytime, anywhere-at home, on the go or at school. The ENL teacher can make assignments and track student progress with online assessment and student recording. b. TBE program. If applicable. N/A c. DL program. If applicable. N/A 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? 2  Students who are at Entering and Emerging levels will be pulled out by a certified ENL teacher and receive one unit of study in Integrated ENL/ELA instruction to develop English language skill so that they can succeed in core content courses. Students at the entering level will also receive Stand-Alone ENL 180 minutes per week; while students at the emerging level will also receive Stand-Alone ENL 90 minutes per week. However, students at the transitional and expanding levels will be in a Push-in model class where the ENL teacher works with ELLs in collaboration with general education classroom teacher to provide language acquisition and vocabulary support. They will receive Integrated ENL instruction 180 minutes per week. Former ELLS will receive 90 minute- per- week of Integrated ENL in ELA/Core Content Area instruction for two additional years. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. The ENL teacher integrates ESL in the content area (Math, Science, and Social Studies) in the thematic learning activities. Graphic organizers, posters, CD, Computers and literature books related to the subject area are used during the activities. Students work through each unit, which will enable them to master both language and the concept. To ensure that ELLs meet the Common Core Learning Standards and pass the required State assessments (ELA), the ENL teacher uses a Balanced Literacy Approach. This approach will allow students to read age appropriate materials with understanding and to select books on a variety of genres. It also enables students to participate in an accountable book talk, and read for information. ELL students will also participate in an After-School Literacy Program. We will use monthly classroom assessments and results from the Acuity report to ensure that students are making adequate gains. Finally, students are able to write for a variety of purposes with proper use of language and convention. The ENL teacher will collaborate with all the classroom teachers, the Literacy Team, and Intervention Team to develop and facilitate Professional Development Plans, workshops, study groups and focus groups focusing on providing teachers with practical strategies for teaching and assessing ELL students in their classrooms. This collaborative plan will be done in the monthly intervention meeting. An ELL articulation form which indicates the pace of the lesson and the needed aspects in the learning of the ELL students is distributed to classroom teachers to fill out monthly in order to coordinate the ENL instruction plan collaboratively with the classroom teachers. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? Due to no BIL/DL program in our school, the Native Language and Subjects (Science/ Math/Social Studies) are not taught in the native language. However, ENL program has native language support in the classroom. There are bilingual books in the class library. During the Silent Reading Period (about 15 minutes every day), students are encouraged to read the literature in their native language. For the beginners of English proficiency, they are encouraged to read 100%-70% of the books in their language. For the intermediate students, they are encourage to read 50% of the book in their native language, while for the advanced students, they are encouraged to read 25% of the books in their native language. Math text books in Spanish are also used by the new Spanish speaking comers during the instruction in the class. Students also have the access to interactive leveled e-Book in their native language from RAz-Kids. Every leveled eBook has an accompanying eQuiz to read reading comprehension in their native language. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status a. The SIFE students will be placed in a small group setting. These students will receive additional services. Another intervention team member will provide instructional service for these students. The ENL teacher will also provide a tutorial class for these students. These students will also attend an after-school program. b.For ELL students in US schools less than three years (new comers), the ENL teacher will provide these students with additional 180 minutes per week instruction. These students will be placed in groups according to their language proficiency levels and needs. They will also attend the extension program, i.e. Thirty-seven and half minutes program and after school program. In order to prepare these students for the required ELA test, different test strategies will be introduced and 3  practiced during instruction. c. For ELL students receiving more than 4 years, the ENL teacher will use data analysis and consult with Pupil Personnel Team to identify these students’ areas of difficulties and needs. Differentiated strategies will be used for these students to achieve proficiency on the NYSESLAT. d. For Long-term ELLs which we only have one, we offer him special help during the day targeting specific skills in literacy. Our enrichment for this student include the focus on inquiry-learning to enable the students in developing critical thinking skills. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? The main focus of our ENL program is to help ELLS acquire English as fast as they can and to prepare them to be ready to function independently in their classroom. Beginners focus on learning basic communication skills (so that they can interact with their peers and staff more easily) and fundamentals of English-language acquisition, while the intermediate and advanced students focus more on their individual English -language acquisitive needs- especially involving the reading writing strands of the Common Core Strands. Teachers across the school help ELLS by using ENL strategies such as modeling, visuals, big books and picture books for read aloud and vocabulary development, using authentic materials for show and tell, using graphic organizers such as Venn diagrams, webs, T-chart, semantic mapping, story mapping, KWL charts, collaborative research projects, journal writing, choral and guided reading, as well as games and role-playing. The ENL teacher also collaborates with the IEP Teacher to identify ELLs with disabilities and to ensure these students receive all services mandated on their IEPs. The ENL teacher also collaborates with other Special Education staff (ie Guidance Counselor, Speech Teacher, Bilingual Social Worker) to ensure ELLs with disabilities receive appropriate schedules for the ENL services. Since all students are expected to meet all performance standards and benchmarks, our instructional program offers all students, including our special needs students extended day and after-school instruction in literacy and math two days a week. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? ELLs with special needs have guided instruction that matches the students IEPs, along with differentiated instruction planned collaboratively with the ENL teacher and the Special Education staff. Collaboration between all providers is the focus of our plan to ensure ELL-SWDs whose IEP mandates Bilingual/ESL receive appropriate programs and to enrich instruction and assist students in the classroom. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. Our Intervention Team consists of Literacy Coaches, Math Coach, Resource Room Teacher, Science Teacher and Speech Teacher will push into the classroom or pull out ELL students who have received level 1 or 2 on the ELA and Math test with additional services. The Intervention Team will meet monthly to review students’ progress and discuss the varied strategies to help improve these targeted students’ skills needed in the content areas of ELA, Math, Science and Social Studies. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? A new curriculum program , Leader in Me, is used by our entire school. It teaches 21st century leadership and life skills to students and creates a culture of student empowerment based on the idea that every child can be a leader. It provides a logical, sequential and balanced process to help schools proactively design the culture that reflects their vision of the ideal school. Content from The 7 Habits of Highly Effective People is a key component of the overall The Leader in Me process. The 7 Habits is a synthesis of universal, timeless principles of personal and interpersonal effectiveness, such as responsibility, vision, integrity, teamwork, collaboration and renewal, which are secular in nature and common to all people and cultures. Another new program, MaxScholar, a intervention reading on-line program, helps students who are struggling to learn to read. it is based on the research-based methods of the Orton-Gillingham approach, the Lindamood-Bell Process, and other phonics, and reading comprehension strategies. It is adaptable to students age and need, and are accessible on any computer 4  or tablet. Also the writing programs teaches how to write basic paragraphs, retell passages, answer open-ended questions, and learn to take notes on a passage. In order to build up students' talents and natural abilities our school has started a series of clubs taught be the various teachers in our school. The clubs include sewing, art, song writing, stepping, and cheer-leading, etc. These clubs are held on Fridays during the third period. Students are allowed to choose the club they would like to join, giving them greater control over their learning. Raz-Kids is a teaching product that provides comprehensive leveled reading resources for students. With hundreds of e-Books offered at 27 different levels of reading difficulty, it's easy to put the right content in every student's hands. Kids access their leveled text through an interactive learning portal designed to keep them motivated and engaged. Every e-Book is available in online and mobile formats, and allows students to listen to, read at their own pace, and record themselves reading. Students then take a corresponding e-Quiz complete with an extended answer response to test comprehension and determine future instruction needs. Once a child has read ten or more of the leveled e-Books and passed each of the corresponding e-Quizzes, they advance on to the next reading level where they have access to lengthier and more difficult text. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? N/A 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. Our school provides all ELLs with equal access to all school programs during the school day, such as music, gym, band, chorus, and computer. There is also an outside organization which conducts an after-school program to provide students with homework help and engage students in different fun activities , such as sports, music and visual art. This program is free to all applicants. Students also have the opportunity to participate in field trips to different places in New York City. This gives them the opportunity to experience first-hand different topics in social studies and science already studied in class. Title III after school program will be provided for all the ELL students. Thirty-seven and half minutes program is scheduled after the last period. The ELL students will be pulled out by the ESL teacher or other teacher according their language proficiency levels to enhance their reading and math skills. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. In order to prepare ELL students for the ELA test, Reading Express is used to support ELL students. Reading Express is a complete resource kit for helping teachers meets the specific standards-based reading needs of the students in grade 3, 4, and 5. The lessons begin with teacher modeling followed by shared reading, guided reading and applying as the degree of control gradually shifts from the teacher to the students. Each grade level contains approximately 60 lessons. Each lesson is focused on a particular reading skill. The kit includes Teacher’s Guide, Teacher support binder, and Assessment Resource with Exam software, ELL resource, and Teacher Too kid CD. Differentiated instruction is an integral part of the daily instruction for students To prepare ELL students for the State-wide Math test, the Language of Math is also used to support ELL students in enhancing their math skills. This program is developed especially for ELL students, teaching the essential academic language of the math curriculum. It includes the Student learning System, and the Teacher Toolkit. The Student Learning System includes Students Work Text and Student Vocabulary Cards. The Teacher toolkit includes Student Worksheets, Teacher Transparencies, Teacher CD-Rom, Assessment handbook, and ELL Best Practice Audio CD. The workshop model is used in instruction, and content is differentiated for students at varying levels. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? 5  The ENL programs at PS 81 not only provides a nurturing environment that promotes effective teaching and learning, but also provides rich learning environments with equitable opportunities for learning, encourages and respect the diversity of students, staff and community and meets the linguistic, social, academic, physical and emotional needs of our ELLs. We believe that a student’s native language supports progress in English literacy and therefore all ELLs are provided with the same high quality instruction that monolingual students receive. In the classroom teachers provide buddies/partners who speak the same native language for newly enrolled ELLS. Teachers in the building who speak various other languages than English also serve as translators for newly enrolled ELLs and their parents. In the ENL classroom, we also provides bilingual and native language books in the ELL's native languages. In addition ELLs are provided with bilingual dictionaries in the classroom if needed. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. All of our required support services for our ELL's correspond to their ages and grade levels. Students are grouped according to their ages and grades. All curriculum and support materials are age and grade appropriate in order to assist our ELL's in becoming successful in our school. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? Our school shares a building with PS4, District 75 Special School. We share the gym, auditorium, and lunch room. The ENL teacher at PS 4 and our ENL teacher are buddy-teachers. They share ENL strategies and strategies for ELLs with learning disability with each other. They will visit the classrooms and discuss the progress of the students. They also share the information from workshops to ensure that all the Ells' academic, linguistic, socio-emotional needs are met. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). In June of each school year, teachers prepare welcome letters for new students and their parents. This letter is written in English and Spanish, and is given to students along with a list of age appropriate books for reading, summer activities, and a supply list. This packet is also given to new parents at registration. The main office keeps additional packets for parents who register children at the end of the summer. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? Currently, because of budget constraints, we are unable to offer electives to our ELL students. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? N/A Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? The ENL teacher attends regular professional development in Language Arts and Mathematics offered through the Office of English Language Learners. She also attends the Annual Reading, Mathematics, Science, ENL and Special Leadership Institute offered through the Department of Education. The ENL teacher not only receives ongoing staff development from the Office 6  of English Language Learners but also other outside educational organizations to provide the highest quality of instruction. The ENL teacher will visit other schools in order to observe ENL programs in these schools. This will give each teacher the opportunity to observe colleagues’ classrooms and teaching strategies in order to expand their own professional growth. The ENL teacher will attend a monthly math and literacy staff development meeting at PS 81. All teachers will receive professional development in Language Acquisition, Scaffolding Instruction in Literacy and Math, and Balanced Literacy: Considerations in ELLs and using the Native language to support English Language Acquisition.Classroom teachers and coaches are also given opportunities to attend ELL workshops. The literacy coach and the ENL teacher attends LAP, and NYSESLAT administration workshops, and other ELL workshops offered our network -CEI-PEA. The assistant principal also attends LAP, and NYSESLAT administration workshops. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. In order to meet the the professional development requirement per CR Part 154.2: 15% of the total hours for all the teachers and 50% of the total hours for Bilinqual education/ENL teachers receive ELL specific professional development. The ENL teacher facilitates four workshops for classroom teachers annually to provide them with effective strategies for working with ELLs in their classroom: Introduction to the NYSESLAT, Strategies for Classroom Teachers of ELLs, Language Acquisition, and Scaffolding Learning for ELLs. Teachers can also attend the ELL workshops offered through the United Federation of Teachers, as well as workshops offered by CEI-PEA (School Network). Agendas from workshops are kept on file in the main office and a copy is placed in teachers' files. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? The ENL teacher will schedule the date and the time to meet with the parent or guardians of ELLs individually to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency, assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas during Parent Contact time every Tuesday from 2:20 pm to 3:40 pm. A bilingual para professional will be at the meeting to translate as needed. For annual individual meeting with ELL parents, the ENL teacher will record attendance, content of phone calls or letters and parent's concerns to ensure parent needs are accommodated 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Parents are actively involved in the school through various activities such as: parent workshops in Math, Social Studies and ELA, Curriculum Night, annual Family Literacy Night, Family Games Night, Math Night, Mother/child and Father/child breakfast, Poetry Slam, and the School Leadership. Translation services are provided by the Parent Coordinator and other bilingual staffs. To promote learning at home, all parents, including the parents of ELL students, are invited to participate in the PTA and all workshops during the year. The PTA coordinates a survey to determine parents' needs and school administrators lead staff in analyzing the the school's Learning Environment Survey to detect areas of needs. The Parent Coordinator works with ELL parents to assist in translating outreach materials for parents to indicate the areas of need and schedules workshops in which they are invited to participate. At all school events mentioned above, parent coordinator, school personnel and other volunteers who are bilingual are on hand to provide translation services for ELL parents who are not English speakers. Other bilingual staff will help to translate as needed. 7  To enhance ELL parents' literacy skills and prepare them to acquire the skills that will enable them to pursue meaningful employment and post-secondary education, our school provide ELL parents with classes of English for speakers of other language on Tuesday and Wednesdays from 5:00pm-8:00pm. Parents’ needs are evaluated through surveys and evaluations that are given during workshops, and through conversations on visits to school. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. N/A 8 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Cheryl Ault- Baker, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 9  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: The Thaddeus Stevens Elementar School DBN: K16081 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Cheryl Ault-Barker Title Principal Michele goudy Assistant Principal Judith Daniels Parent Coordinator Hsiu-Na Wang ENL/Bilingual Teacher April King Cicely Lewis N/A Parent Teacher/Subject Area Teacher/Subject Area Kathy Polight Coach Michele Mavrovouniotis Coach Timisha Harvell School Counselor Rahesha Amon-Harris N/A N/A N/A N/A Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member N/A Other N/A Other N/A Other N/A Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 9/25/17 9/25/17 9/25/17 /9/25/17 9/25/17 9/25/17 9/25/17 9/25/17 9/25/17 9/25/17 19/25/17 N/A N/A 1N/A 1N/A 0  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 16K081 School Name: Thaddeus Stevens Superintendent: RaheshaAmon The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No (*Primary)Hsiu Wang ENL Teacher Michele Mavrovouniotis Literacy Coach yes no yes no * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. When the data is retrieved from the Home Language Survey, ATS reports and Student Emergency Contact cards, teachers fluent in each language (we are fortunate) would first reach out to the parents before accessing 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. 1 Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Language Bengali, Chinese, Spanish and French 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. Parent handbook, monthly newsletters, calendars, all notices and program information are translated and sent to parents in their home language. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide interpretation service(s)? IN August, pre-K and kindergarten parents are invited to an orientation breakfast. During the first two weeks of school each class has a parent tea and parents are invited to a curriculum night. Twice in the semester, we have family style meals for parents and students, exercise classes and food and nutrition classes once a month for all parents. The attendance team and teachers do make phone calls when students are absent or late. At least once every 2  month, parents are celebrated . Our school has open access every THURSDAY from 9:00am to 12:00noon where parents are allowed to visit any classroom and observe the instruction. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? We provide parent surveys after PTA meetings, during SLT meetings and we also have a suggestion and solution box by our parent bulletin /information board which is located at the entrance of the school. 3 
