 21K096 School Name: I.S. 096 SETH LOW Principal: ERIN LYNCH 2018-19 CEP-CS 1  Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC)   Section 1: School Information Page School Information School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Seth Low IS 96 332100010096 6-8 99 Avenue P Brooklyn, NY 11204 718-236-1344 Phone Number: School Number (DBN): 21K096 718-236-2397 Fax: Erin Lynch Elynch3@schools.nyc.gov Email Address: School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Erin Lynch Dominica Fiume Kadijah Kourdaze Maria Corso Patricia Rubin None None None District Information Geographical District: 21 Isabel Dimola Superintendent: 1401 Emmons Ave. Brooklyn, NY 11235 Superintendent’s Office Address: IDimola@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718-648-0209 Phone Number: 718-648-2165 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC)   Brooklyn South Mauricière de Govia FSC: Executive Director’s Office Address: Executive Director: 415 89 th Street, Brooklyn, NY 11209 mdegovia@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 718-759-4843 Phone Number: 718-630-1633 Fax:   Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Erin Lynch Dominica Fiume Patricia Rubin Maria Corso Elena Kamaeva Ivelisse Fanas Helen Torres *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/Assistant Principal Member/ Teacher Member/Teacher   Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Tzipora Richmond Sharese Wilson Debra Lorenzo Danielle Blickhahn Florence Wang Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/Teacher Member/ Teacher Member/ Member/   Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with   the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement   Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? The mission of I.S. 96 is to create an environment that fosters responsible creative students who take ownership of their academic achievement. This will be accomplished through high expectations put forth by following the Common Core Learning Standards, utilizing differentiated instruction, infusing technology and analyzing data by the uniqueness of the student. We commit to all students reaching this goal by maintaining a positive learning environment in the classroom and creating an atmosphere where children enjoy and value learning. Through collaboration,   communication and evaluation among students, parents and staff we will ensure that all students are on their way to being college and career ready. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. Seth Low I.S. 96 is a unique school because of the diversity of our student population. Our school is in Bensonhurst but serves Coney Island and Gravesend as well. Our students are 29% Special Education and 37% English Language Learners. We are committed to offering every student a well rounded and rigorous education as well as opportunities to grow socially and emotionally. We are a Community Learning School! Our CBO partner is the United Federation of Teachers. We also have partnerships with Urban Advantage, Maimonides Hospital, Microsoft IT Academy, New York Center for Interpersonal Development, Computers for Youth, Council for Unity, Broadway Junior, The Leadership Program and Classroom Inc. We believe that middle school is a place where students begin to develop their long term goals and dreams. To help foster those plans we have created the partnerships listed above to offer students specialty classes such as Physicians assistant training, Zoology, Mentoring, Leadership, IT Academy as well as Orchestra, Band, Dance, Culinary Arts, Visual Arts and Theater. We strive to expose students to a variety of possible career paths so they leave middle school with a passion, a goal and a plan for success. We also strive to have every student reading on grade level by graduation. To assist in meeting that goal we partner with MSQI (Middle School Quality Initiative) and are a Learning Partners School (LPP). 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. Our students are 29% Special Education and 37% English Language Learners. Our Special Educations students’ placements range from 12:1, 12:1:1, ICT, and SETSS. Related services include Speech, Counseling, Occupational Therapy, Physical Therapy and Adaptive Physical Education. In addition we also have an NYU NEST Program for students with autism who have social/emotional needs. Our ELL students’ levels include entering, emerging, transitioning and expanding who require ENL instruction as well as language scaffolds and supports in all content area classes. In addition they require reinforcement and support outside of the regular school day. We also have SIFE (Students with Interrupted Formal Education) students who require more emotional and remedial support than average students. Our current 8th grade students are also a special population because the majority that did not meet proficiency on the 2018 NYS ELA and Math test were our current 8th graders. In addition, compared to 8th graders in years past although there was growth on periodic assessments and DRP scores, it was the lowest percentage of growth when compared to the other grades. Lastly our OORS data indicates that close to 50% of incidents involved our 8th grade students with the majority of incidents taking place in the classroom. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. The Framework for Great Schools: Rigorous Instruction: This is an area of success for us with a lot of work ahead to continue to improve student achievement. We have successfully created and aligned all curriculum to the Common Core Learning Standards. Teachers have put countless hours into refining curriculum to include scaffolds and differentiation to meet the needs of our diverse learners while maintaining the integrity and expectations of grade level standards. We are working on teacher effectiveness to ensure that the level of rigor and engagement in the delivery of the curriculum is consistent in every classroom. This year we will shift our focus to what we teach students in the process of activities so that it is 0  equally important as the product. We will also be looking closely at the academic support offered to ELL students and students with IEPs. Supportive Environment: This is a continued area of focus for us this school year although we have made great strides in this areas over the last year. Through our needs assessment, last year, we determined that mental health and student support was an area we needed to create an action plan around. Through our Community Schools Grant we put social workers in place to support students. We created a crisis team and worked hard on the creation and implementation of a de-escalation plan. However we still need to focus more on Social Emotional Learning and supporting all students as individuals. This is the focus of two of our CEP goals this year as we move to advisories school wide and individualized student programs. Collaborative Teachers: This is an area of success for our school. Teachers have PLC time and common planning time in both department and grade level teams built into their programs 3 times a week. During this time teachers assess student work, refine and revise curriculum and plan intervention. We do a comprehensive needs assessment for professional development each year that includes teacher and paraprofessional surveys, teacher advance data, state test results by teacher and analysis of schools goals and current educational research to design a yearlong professional development plan. Our teachers take part in the Teacher Leadership Program and have fostered a culture of learning between all members of the staff. Collaboration is definitely an area that we are very successful in and attribute or recent rise in student progress to. This year we are looking to grow our teacher teams into clusters to foster deeper relationships with students as individuals. Effective School Leadership: As a fairly new administration we are committed to the professional growth of every staff member and the success of each student. We have successfully transformed our PD into a cycle based learning experience with real hands on planning and practice. We are also strengthening the accountability of teachers and administration through the observation and feedback process. This year we plan to continue to create a culture of inter visitation between staff by adding more teacher leaders as mentors and coaches. In addition we will be adopting the restorative circles approach to encourage staff to deepen their relationships with students. Strong Family-Community Ties: This is still an area of focus for us this school year and is our second area of focus within our Community Learning Schools partnership. We are creating more partnerships and coming up with innovative ways to engage families and community members. We have successfully created a Language Access Team that delivers all parent messages and workshops in parents' native languages. Additionally, we have partnered with Office of Adult and Continuous Education, OACE, to provide adult education to our parents and community members. This year we hope to grow those partnerships to include cooking and chess, as well as strengthen our partnership with FIAO Beacon. We are also in year two as part of MSQI's Academic Parent Teacher Teams (APTT) and will expand the program to include the entire 6th grade. Trust: This is an area of success for us. Last year’s Citywide Instructional Expectations inspired us to do a lot of work around getting to know all students and strengthen staff collaboration. As a result there is a new level of trust that enables us to refine teacher effectiveness and increase student achievement. Seth Low IS 96 is a community committed to students and families. 1  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 21K096 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 06,07,08 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 779 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 59 65 9 30 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 49 44 18 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 78.0% % Attendance Rate 76.4% % Reduced Lunch 31.3% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.1% 26.2% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 29.7% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 4.81 2% 10% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 38.8% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A YES NO NO YES Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A NO YSH NO YES Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A NO NO N/A NO High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 65 69 9 94.0% 1.3% 22.3% 9.5% 33.4% 1.3% 6 29% 5.4 43.0% 49% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No NO NO N/A NO NO NO YES N/A YES NO N/A NO N/A NO NO N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. With our growing population of English Language Learners (ELL) students, it is evident that we must ensure rigorous support for their language and academic progress. Our building services 38% of ELL students with over 15 languages. Our ELL students’ levels include entering, emerging, transitioning and expanding who require ENL instruction as well as language scaffolds and supports in all content area classes. We identified 40% of students did not progress on the 2018 NYSESLAT. It is evident our students require reinforcement and support outside of the regular school day, in which we provide an after school Title 3 program to support student achievement. We provide students with the tools they need to achieve this goal by implementing various instructional programs and strategies. We track students through the administration of the DRP. The DRP is an assessment that determines students' Lexile levels and generates readings at their level. It uses accepted and proven benchmarks for assessment and instruction from the Lexile. In addition, we use ELL periodic assessment to track student growth and identify student needs. Our School Quality Guide also indicates that our ELL subgroup does not make significant progress on the ELA exam when compared to non ESL students. In addition, it became apparent that general education staff were unclear to NYSESLAT data. With the aid of our ELL coach, we converted NYSESLAT scores into percentages and including TOM’s standards on writing rubrics. This enables teachers and students to understand and be aware of expectations. We also invited Science and Social Studies teachers to become part of the Continuous Learning Partners (CLP) program which had a focus on developing the academic language of ELL students. In the 2017/2018 year, teachers developed scaffolds and methods of developing academic language for retention with ELL students. In our final inquiry cycle, we identified that 85% of students retained academic vocabulary through the course of the program. In addition 80% of ESL students in targeted classes had an increase in core course grades. With this knowledge, we plan to expand the CLP program across multiple disciplines to impact ELL achievement. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Our goal is to empower ELLs to acquire the listening, speaking, reading and writing skills they need to become proficient speakers of English. By June 2019, 75% of targeted students will reach or exceed their individual student goals within the 3  4 modalities of the NYSESLAT as measured by ELL Periodic Assessments, teacher created Mock NYSESLAT benchmarks, and the Degrees of Reading Power Exam. Target Group 65% of students who did not show growth as defined on the 2018 NYSESLAT score report will show growth in English language proficiency of at least one level as measure by the 2019 NYSESLAT exam . 75% of Continuous Learning focus students will show growth in proficiency of at least one level as measured by the 2019 NYSESLAT exam. 4  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). 1. Teachers will engage in common planning at least once weekly with ELL teachers to update and refine plans to ensure access to all ELL students. 2. Teacher's will participate in ELL specific professional development to support the needs of our students. This includes but is not limited to Monday afternoon professional learning cycles and Continuous Learning Program (CLP). 3. Professional development and common planning will aid in ensuring ENL, ELA, Science and Social Studies Teachers will use elements of the SIOP model to plan their lessons. This will ensure that we are building background knowledge, creating and meeting language objectives, as well as fostering speaking interactions. 4. Teachers participating in CLP will work with ENL Teachers. We will complete Inquiry Science Fellowship to deeply analyze data of targeted students to determine their specific needs. They will work in collaboration with teachers of selected classes to support these students throughout the school year. 5. ELL students will complete ENL periodic assessments in October and March to measure the 4 modalities. 6. Teachers will analyze and utilize data as a team at least once a week to drive and implement instruction. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? 65% of students who did not show growth as defined on the 2018 NYSESLAT score report will move at least one level on the NYSESLAT. 75% of Continuous Learning focus students will show at least one level on the NYSESLAT. 1 - 4 September 2018 – June 2019 Principal, A.P, Math Coach, Data Specialist and Programmer 5. ELL Periodic Assessment October 2018 - March 2019 6 - 8. September 2018 - June 2019 9. September 2018, January 2019, May 2019 10. Title 3 December 2018 - May 2019 5  7. ENL teachers will use the results of the ENL Periodic Assessment to drive their instruction and create student goals. 8. The Continuous Learning program will target students as identified by the above data. 9. The Degrees of Reading Power (DRP) will be administered 3 times this school year (September, January, May) to determine and monitor students' reading levels. 10. Targeted students will be required to attend the Title III after school program beginning in December and running through May twice weekly. Teachers will use a chosen research based instructional program that supports the learning needs of each student. 11. Each parent will collaboratively work with teachers to foster student progress by conferencing during Tuesday afternoon parent outreach at least 2 times per year. Teacher will provide parents with course outlines in their native language, discuss their current ENL level as well as the indicators necessary to meet their individual goals. They will also offer parents tools to support students' English language acquisition at home. 12. 50% of targeted students will participate in a home visit . The visit will be done by staff members with a specific focus on creating partnerships with families so that we can fully support students and families with shared visions and future goals. A baseline Performance Series will be given at 3 points during the year to track student progress. Additionally all mid and end unit assessments will be given through school net so that student progress can be tracked and standard mastery can be gauged and compared to the baseline and midpoint assessments. Teachers will use formative assessments to monitor students weekly using the data from Reflex and IXL to discuss students at common planning and will adjust action plans and student supports. 11-12, September 2018 - June 2019 Students that achieved a 1.6-2.99 on the 2016 State exam September 2018, January 2019 and June 2019 Principal, A.P, Math Coach, Data Specialist and Programmer 6  3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Parents will be invited to participate in workshops to develop strategies and understand how to incorporate language acquisition at home. Teachers will provide parents with course outlines in their native language, discuss their current ENL level as well as the indicators necessary to meet their individual goals. They will also offer parents tools to support students' English language acquisition at home. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Additional hiring of an ENL Teacher, Reading Teacher, Wilson Curriculum, NYS Exams- Item Skills Analysis; Curriculum Adaptations of CMP3; per session activities; textbooks; NYSED resources (engage NY); online resources and programs such as NEWSELA and iReady; library resources; class/family trips (Urban Advantage); Community Learning Schools Support Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By January 2019, 50% of targeted students will meet the mid-year benchmark to indicate sufficient progress toward meeting their June 2019 goal as evidenced by ELL periodic assessment and the DRP. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) Periodic Assessment, DRP Tracking sheets will be used to monitor all results from the assessments. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 7  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? Based on the 2017-2018 NYS ELA and Math Exams we had a significant decrease in the number of students that scored a level 1, however the majority that did not meet proficiency were our current 8th graders. In addition, compared to 8th graders in years past although there was growth on periodic assessments and DRP scores, it was the lowest percentage of growth when compared to the other grades. Lastly our OORS data indicates that close to 50% of incidents involved our 8th grade students with the majority of incidents taking place in the classroom. In accordance with The Framework for Great Schools’ focus on Supportive Environment and Rigorous Instruction, there is a need to increase the academic progress and support for all students including those students with disabilities in the ICT and 12:1:1 settings, ENL students and students struggling to meet proficiency. Our average Instruction, as a result, will focus on key elements of student understanding across grade levels and content areas including reading comprehension, oral and written expression, and inquiry-based learning practices. Teacher will employ multiple strategies to differentiate and scaffold instruction to provide student choice and entry points for all readiness levels. In order to better support the whole child in every class all 8th grade standard classes will have two teachers to reduce the teacher to student ratio and students will have flexible programming giving all students access to a least restrictive environment, accelerated classes and regents classes where appropriate. We are increasing the number of regents classes in Algebra and Living Environment and providing support for students with IEPs and ENL students within those classes. In addition all students will be involved in an advisory program twice weekly. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019 75% of 8th grade students will be mastering at least 70% of Reading, Writing, Math and Science standards evidenced by tracking individual students performance on standards based assessments which will be recorded on the mastery of standards checklist. 8  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Administration, Principal and Assistant Principals, Coaches, Model and Collaborative Teachers All 8th grade students Sept 2018- June 2019 1.Teachers will be trained in specialized reading programs including Wilson, Wilson Just Words and shared reading in order to increase DRP scores and lexile levels. Students will receive this targeted instruction 2-4 times per week. Students will also engage in benchmarks within these programs monthly. 2. Teachers will engage in cluster meetings with interdisciplinary teachers to case conference and discuss individual students progress weekly. 3. Teaches will engage in organized Common Planning twice weekly to update and refine Curriculum Plans in order to give multiple entry points for students of all readiness levels and to target various learning styles. Administration will support this work by offering strategies during Monday PD cycles. 4. Intervention periods will be created based on data and by using parallel programs beginning in September through June. 5. Small group instruction offered in the “WIN” periods in the 6-2 model. We will be using shortage area coverages to minimize class size during the 2 “WIN” periods per week. Aligned with the collaborative teacher goal teachers will utilize data from a central location in order to individualize instruction for growth and progress. 2x-4x Weekly 2X Weekly 6-8 Week Cycles from October -June 2X Weekly 9  6. Teachers will implement student self assessment criteria for students to be able to set individual goals and reflect upon their own work and progress each quarter during student conferences for a total of four times per year. 7. Through parent outreach, ensure that students that targeted students attend the after school AIS program two days a week for further remediation or enrichment from November to April. 8. Saturday Academy- ten sessions for students to build on skills that were acquired during weekly instruction, build stamina in preparation for the 2019 State ELA and Math exam and practice test taking strategies to ensure optimal performance. This is will happen once a week beginning in January through May. 9. Advisers will check in monthly with targeted students to gauge the supportive environment effectiveness by assessing how students feel about their progress and support. Advisers will provide feedback to teachers. 10 Mental Health Providers will provide parent workshops 4 times a year (November, January, March, May) to help parents understand students' academic and social/emotional goals and the steps they need to take to meet those goals. Parents will be given specific strategies to support students at home. 11. Flexible programming will be structured in a way that all students who demonstrate readiness will have access to accelerated classes and regents opportunity including students with IEPs and ENL classification. 12. All students will take part in an advisory program twice weekly where they will engage in restorative circles which will serve as the vehicle for their Social Emotional Learning. 13. Four additional teachers will be hired to reduce class size. 4X per year (Nov, Jan, March, June) 2X Weekly Nov-April Saturdays Jan-April Monthly 4x year (Nov, Jan, March, May) 0  Sept 2018 Sept-June 2019 August 2018 September 2018-June 2019 BOY-9/18 Mid-1/19 EOY-5-6/19 Administration, Principal and Assistant Principals, Coaches, Model and Collaborative Teachers A baseline assessment in each subject will be given at 3 points during the year to track student progress and mastery of standards. Additionally students will take the Degrees of Reading Power exam at 3 points during the school year to track reading levels. On demand writes will be given quarterly to track students' writing progress. Teachers will use formative assessments to monitor students weekly using the data to discuss students at common planning to adjust action plans and student supports. All 8th grade teachers N/A N/A 3b – Parent and Family Engagement N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Students and families will be able to see student progress and the curriculum by utilizing Pupil Path and IO assessment. In addition we will conduct targeted parent outreach using our language access team to ensure students are signed up for and attending the after school and weekend support as outlined in the action plan. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. NYS School Quality Snapshot, 2017-18; Centralized Data System, IO assessment, NYS Exams- Item Skills Analysis; Curriculum Adaptations of Expeditionary Learning; per session activities; PBIS Science Curriculum; NYSED resources (engage NY); online resources and programs such as NEWSELA and IReady; library resources; class/family trips; Community Schools Support Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. 1  X X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By January 2019 50% of targeted students will achieve at least approaching standards on mid-year benchmark to indicate sufficient progress toward meeting their June 2019 goal. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. School created standards based assessments, DRP, and tracking sheets for on demand writing and standard mastery. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Based on 2017-2018 Performance Series, DRP, On Demand Writing data and in accordance with the Framework for Great schools’ focus on collaborative teachers and rigorous instruction, there is a need to increase the academic progress for Students with Disabilities in ICT, 12:1 and 12:1:1 programs. Specifically, 34% of students in ICT classes across all grades regressed on performance series and 38% of students in 12:1 and 12:1:1 classes regressed across all grades. Instruction, as a result, will focus on key elements of student understanding across grade levels and content areas including reading comprehension, oral and written expression, and inquiry-based learning practices. Teachers will employ multiple strategies to differentiate and scaffold instruction to provide student choice and entry points for all readiness levels. WIN periods will focus on reading at independent levels and progress monitoring through running records. Writing rubrics and all assessments will be coded by standards to be able to measure growth in the mastery of specific standards and standards, overall. Baseline, mid year and unit exams will measure progress on standards throughout the year. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019 all special education students will be provided targeted individual instruction in ELA and Math resulting in 75% of special education students showing a percent change greater than 50% in the mastery of standards as measure by the mastery of standards checklist and the promotion criteria checklist. 3  Part 3a – Action Plan 1. Teaches will engage in organized Common Planning twice weekly to update and refine Curriculum Plans in order to give multiple entry points for students of all readiness levels and to target various learning styles. Administration will support this work by offering strategies during Monday PD cycles. 2. Periodic Assessments will be given in September and Jan/February to measure the growth in standards and reading levels. 3. All teachers will use the results of the Math, Reading and Writing Periodic Assessment to drive their instruction and create student goals. 4. ENL, ELA, Science and Social Studies Teachers will use elements of the SIOP model to plan their lessons. This will ensure that we are building background knowledge, creating and meeting language objectives, as well as fostering speaking interactions. 5. The Degrees of Reading Power will be administered 3 times this school year (September, January, May) to determine and monitor students' reading levels. 6. After instruction of each genre of writing teachers will measure the impact of their teaching and student writing progress by administering on demand writing assessments which will be tracked over time. This will happen 4 times per year. 7. Teachers will analyze and utilize data as a team twice a week to drive and implement instruction. ICT, 12:1:1 and 12:1 Classroom setting students. Sept. 2018-June 2019 2x-Weekly Administration, teachers and coaches. September, January/February and May Daily Daily Sept, Jan, May 4  8. Targeted students will be required to attend AIS and Saturday Academy. Teachers will use a chosen research based instructional program. In addition, targeting students will be places in data driven WIN ( WHAT I NEED) periods for targeted instruction 2 X a week in ELA and 1 X in Math. 9. Each parent will collaboratively work with teachers to foster student progress by conferencing during Tuesday afternoon parent outreach at least 2 times per year. Teacher will provide parents with course outlines in their native language, discuss their current mastery level as well as the indicators necessary to meet their individual goals. They will also offer parents tools to support students' at home. 10. Administration will be reducing class-size for many classes in the 7th and 8th grade to promote more small group targeted instruction. 11. Specialty/Electives are being created to target this population. There will be two specialty classes for literacy- Journalism and Debate as well as a Math speciality to individualize on a need basis. 4x year 2x weekly Dec-May AIS and WIN- weekly Sat Academy January- May Sept 2018-June 2019 Sept. 2018-June 2019 5  3xWeekly 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Through a partnership with MSQI and West Ed, we are creating Academic Parent Teacher Teams that will allow teachers to teach the parents about what all of the data actually means and how they can use it to assist their children in making progress. Through this program teachers will partner with the parents to develop strategies focused around the topics being taught in class and can be worked on at home. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. NYS Science Standards; NYS Exams- Item Skills Analysis; Curriculum Adaptations of Expeditionary Learning and CMP3; per session activities; textbooks; NYSED resources (engage NY); online resources and programs such as NEWSELA and IReady; library resources; class/family trips (Urban Advantage); Community Schools Support, collaborative teaching, DVD programs providing visuals for reading such as Pix Writer and Picture It. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019 75% of targeted students will meet the mid-year benchmark to indicate sufficient progress toward meeting their June 2019 goal as evidenced by the midyear mastery of standards checklist and promotion criteria checklist. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. ELA and Math Unit assessments, DRP and on demand writing assessments will be the instrument of measure. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 6  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Based on the Degrees of Reading Power, 2017-2018 NYS ELA Exam, 2018 Science Exam, school based math assessments, 2018 Items Skills Analysis and teacher Advance data there is a need to increase targeted Reading Instruction for all students scoring level 2 on the NYS ELA Exam. In years past we have concentrated on providing Wilson to those students demonstrating decoding and fluency difficulties. However, data is telling us that we need to spend more time concentrating on strengthening students comprehension of text. Data is telling us that our level 2 students are struggling with most questions that involve reading including word problems in math and when students are presented with text on ELA, Science and Social Studies assessments. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, teachers and school administrators will engage in collaboration strategies that support each learners' reading proficiency that will result in improved student achievement as evidenced by an increase of at least two reading levels for 75 % of all students scoring level 2 on the 2018 NYS ELA Exam, this will be measured by the Degrees of Reading Power Exam. 7  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). 1. Baseline (September), mid-year(January) and end-of year(May) DRP assessments to monitor students reading levels 2. Twice weekly common planning meetings by department to analyze student work, identify trends and make necessary revisions in lesson planning to maximize entry points and ensure student growth in writing. 3. Targeted and differentiated professional development in research-based methodologies, (i.e. formative & summative assessments) with small strategically created teacher groups. 4. Continuation of Middle School Quality Initiative (MSQI) reading and discussion protocols. Specifically having the MSQI coach work with a select group of teachers to increase critical thinking during student discussions based on text. 5. MSQI Word Generation, a strategy to build academic vocabulary, will be used school wide in all four subject areas to increase student vocabulary in discussion and writing. 6. We will continue our Urban Advantage partnerships that address literacy skills’ development in Science. This provides hands on learning experiences for students to be able to deepen their understanding, reflect on what they are doing and think more critically while being an active part of their learning. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Principal, Assistant Principals, Programmer, Core Teachers, Coaches, Reading Teacher Students scoring a level 2 on 2018 ELA State Exam. September 2018-June 2019 Sept, Jan, May 2x weekly Mondays Ongoing 8  7. Urban advantage also provides family engagement opportunities both independently as individual families and through organized family trips through our school. Families are given monthly opportunities to learn and discuss together. 8. We will create an advisory program where all students will be monitored academically by an adviser. 9. Social Studies, Math and Science teachers will engage in professional development on Reading Strategies and comprehension support in their content. 10. ELA, Science, Math and Social Studies departments will use common protocols for reading so that expectations for students are clear and consistent. 11. Through parent outreach, ensure targeted students attend the after school AIS program two days a week for support. 12. Saturday Academy- ten sessions for students to build on skills that were acquired during weekly instruction, build stamina in preparation for the 2019 State ELA exam and practice test taking strategies to ensure optimal performance. This is will happen once a week beginning in January through May. This target group of students will also be given targeted writing instruction. 13. Assistant Principal and a content teacher team will continue their work with Continuous Learning to build reading fluency for ENL students in the content area classrooms. 14. Reading Teacher will support our ENL population by providing target reading instruction through the electives and core courses. Ongoing Monthly Ongoing 4x yearly Ongoing Ongoing 9  15. Administration will transition to a standards based grading system and increase the passing grade to 70. 16. Principal and APs will work specifically with teachers of literacy in the ELA, Science & Social Studies departments to revise students tasks and increase daily tasks to make critical thinking visible. 17. The Literacy Coach and MSQI Coach will meet with common planning teams weekly to provide support to ensure that teachers have the resources to ensure that tired differentiation is occurring daily and meaningful data to drive future lessons is being obtained. 18. We will increase to 3 guidance counselors and align them to specific grades. They will provide push in services to all classes once quarterly teaching character development lessons to strengthen students' confidence. 19. All students will take part in an advisory program twice weekly where they will engage in restorative circles which will serve as the vehicle for their Social Emotional Learning. Ongoing 2x weekly Nov-April Saturdays Jan-April Monthly Monthly 0  N/A N/A N/A 2x Monthly weekly N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. We will partner with MSQI to engage in Academic Parent Teacher Teams to support parents in their native language to practice skills with students at home with interactive board games. We will also provide parent workshops in native languages. OACE also offers parents a chance to engage in ENL classes and GED classes to increase their literacy skills to in turn better support their children. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Programming an advisory program, creating advisory curriculum, hiring a 3rd guidance counselor, programming WIN periods, Utilization of a Reading Specialist, Utilization of coaches, programming planning meeting into teachers' programs, Wilson Curriculum, LLI curriculum, Items Skills Analysis, Standards based grading, Restorative Circles training for all teachers and staff. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. 1  X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By January 2019 75% of targeted students will meet the mid-year benchmark as evidenced by increasing their reading level at least one level as measured by the Degrees of Reading Power (DRP) Exam. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. DRP Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Based on feedback from parents on the NYC School Survey and increased parent involvement in Community Schools Events, our school has shown to do a great job communicating with parents, in their preferred home language, ensuring that information is received and understood. We have hired multiple staff members who speak many different languages to assist parents in understanding the ins and outs of the school community, as well as, many available opportunities for them personally. Our families come from around the world and speak approximately 20 different languages; their fluency in English ranges from "superb" to "none." Due to the fact that we can provide face to face translation in more than 10 languages, in SY 2018, we had a tremendous increase in the amount of parents that would come to the Family Center during and after the school day. These parents came to see what the school has to offer not only their child, but the rest of the family as well. The personal relationships that our staff have developed with parents, families, and community partners have led us to have deepened trust and relationships that go far beyond basic student data. Since we have shown tremendous progress in communicating day to day information with parents, we are combining our efforts and adding a focus on involving parents to partner with the teachers in the education of their children. We have found through home grown parent surveys and the NYC School Survey that they have a strong desire to help their children academically, but many of them lack the skills needed to teach specific content. In September 2018, we will use data from the DRP and Math Baseline to determine what skills the students show to the biggest deficit in. We will then conduct our first 6th grade Academic Parent Teacher Teams meeting where parents will work alongside teachers in learning how to teach these specific math and reading skills to their children through playing games at home. We will continue to assess student growth throughout the year and change the skills and interventions as necessary. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, teachers and school administrators will engage in Academic Parent Teacher Teams 3 times per year that will lead to improved student achievement as evidenced by 75% of all 6th grade students increasing their reading 3  proficiency by at least two reading levels in ELA and showing a percent change greater than 50% in the mastery of Math standards as measured by the mastery of standards checklist and the Degrees of Reading Power Exam. 4  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). 1. Through our partnership with MSQI and Academic Parent Teacher Teams, we will conduct 6th grade Parent Teacher conferences in a manner in which parents are taught targeted Math and ELA skills. Parents will also be given teacher created games they can play at home to help enhance their child's performance on those specific skills. Parents will be given data to show them where their child is currently performing on each skill and will then create S.M.A.R.T goals for the length of time they will be playing the games and the percent in which their child will grow in those areas. 2. Monthly meetings will be held monthly to review data, monitor individual student progress, and adjust interventions as needed. 3. Professional development offering research-based strategies for engaging parents in the learning process. All 6th graders September, November, March and May. 4x times Monthly 2 days-July 2018 AP, Community School Director, Parent Coordinator, 6th grade teachers, Family Outreach team, 5  4. Common planning meetings will take place with all teachers one month prior to Parent Teacher conferences to plan engagement activity, determine skills being targeted, and create games to be played one. September to June to look at student work and revise and edit curricula to include differentiation, scaffolding and multiple entry point for various types of learners. 5. Multi-lingual family engagement team will staff an on-site "parent center" and provide full-service interpretation, facilitate parent meetings, and connect families with APTT games and resources in their preferred languages during school and after-school hours. 6. Multi-lingual family engagement team and parent interpreters will continue to offer translation services for games and directions and other written materials sent home. 2 Tuesdays-September 2018 3x Year Ongoing Ongoing AP, Math Lead, ELA Lead, Data Specialists All 6th grade teachers All 6th grade teachers, AP, MSQI coach 6  N/A 7. Administering Math baseline and DRP(September), midyear Math baseline and DRP (December), and end-of year (May/June) Math assessment and DRP to monitor/evaluate student performance and to facilitate differentiation and scaffolding in instruction. N/A 3b – Parent and Family Engagement CSD, CLS, Parent volunteer interpreters N/A N/A N/A All 6th Graders Sep / Dec / May N/A N/A N/A N/A If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. The Community Learning Schools Initiative, the New York Center for Interpersonal Development, Middle School Quality Initiative, and WestEd. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment 7  Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. These activities and programs are centrally funded. Title I Translation money will pay per session to staff for translation at after school events. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By January 2019 75% of targeted students will meet the mid-year benchmark as evidenced by increasing their reading level at least one level and mastering at least 70% of standards taught as measured by the Degrees of Reading Power (DRP) Exam and the mastery of standards checklist. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Reading Level - DRP Sept/Jan/May Math Standards Mastery Sept/Dec/June Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 8  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) All AIS services are determined by pre and post unit assessments. Teachers meet in PLCs and use a looking at student work protocol to analyze students’ strengths and weaknesses and subsequently place students in intervention groups. MOSL baseline assessments include the NYC performance tasks and the items skills analysis from those are used to determine AIS services as well. In ELA specifically, we use the DRP reading level screener as a baseline. Those scores determine further screenings for the Tier II and III intervention classes. We also use the ELAP exam as a midterm progress monitoring tool. Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) 1. Small Group Instruction: One-to-one and small group differentiated instruction during teachers’ professional activity periods Improves students’ comprehension by utilizing direct, explicit instruction and modeling of good reading practices. Students practice and apply these reading strategies and skills by reading highly engaging content, viewing interactive multimedia, and writing in response to reading. 2. Literacy : Pull out model of reading Academic Intervention Services. 3. ENL: After school Title III: ENL small group instruction in a Co-teaching format-one ENL teacher with one English teacher with a 1. Small group 2. Small group 3. Small group Small group 4. Small Group 5. Small group in class 6. Small group 1. This takes place during the school day. 2. This takes place during the school day. 3. This is an after school program. This takes place during the school day. 7. Blended learning model in small groups 4. This takes place during the school day. Small group Small group Whole Class 5. This takes place during the school day. 6. This takes place after school on weekends. 7. This takes place during the school day. Takes place during the school day Takes place during the school day 9  Takes place during the school day Takes place during the school day focus on the writing process. Pull Out : model of ENL Instruction during the day. 4. 6:2 Model: Students receive AIS (2 periods/week) based on ongoing content assessment and item skills analysis. 5. Differentiated Instruction : Teachers use student data to tailor tasks and products to address students’ areas of weakness and build upon their strengths. 6. Title I Afterschool AIS and Saturday Academy: An intervention program designed to improve students’ academic vocabulary and exposure to complex text; aligned to both Citywide Instructional Expectations and Literacy Shifts in ELA. 7. MSQI Initiative: Tiered Interventions . Including: - MyOn: Online, web-based books/novels; building student literacy skills. - Wilson Just Words: Just Words is a highly explicit, multisensory decoding and spelling program for students in grades 4–12 who have mild to 0  moderate gaps in their decoding and spelling proficiency but do not require intensive intervention. The Just Words curriculum provides a sophisticated study of word structure appropriate for students beyond the elementary grades. It provides direct and explicit teaching of “how English works” for both decoding and spelling automaticity. - Wilson Reading System (WRS) is the flagship program of Wilson Language Training and the foundation of all other Wilson programs. Based on Orton-Gillingham principles, WRS is a highly-structured remedial program that directly teaches the structure of the language to students and adults who have been unable to learn with other teaching strategies, or who may require multisensory language instruction. - Word Generations- Word Generation is a research-based vocabulary program for middle school students designed to teach words through language arts, math, science, and social 1  Mathematics studies classes. The program employs several strategies to ensure that students learn words in a variety of contexts. The Word Generation program focuses on academic vocabulary, i.e., words that students are likely to encounter in textbooks and on tests, but not in spoken language . 1. Small Group Instruction: One-to-one and small group differentiated instruction during teachers’ professional activity periods. Improves students’ math skills by utilizing direct, explicit instruction and modeling of mathematical processes. Students practice and apply these strategies and skills by completing and modeling several levels of mathematical problems, viewing interactive multimedia, and writing out processes and reasoning. 2. 6:2 Model Student: Students receive AIS (2 periods/week) based on ongoing content assessment and item skills analysis. City initiative to offer online based courses to students. During the school day and at All AIS services are determined by pre and post unit assessments. Teachers meet in PLCs and use a looking at student work protocol to analyze students’ strengths and weaknesses and subsequently place students in intervention groups. MOSL baseline assessments include the NYC performance tasks and the items skills analysis from those are used to determine AIS services as well. We also use the MAP exam as a midterm progress monitoring tool. 1. Small group 2.Small group 3. Small group 4. Small groups 5. Small groups 6. Small group 1. This takes place during the school day. 2. This takes place during the school day. 3. This takes place during the school day. 4. This takes place during the school day. 5. This takes place after school on weekends. 6. This takes place during the school day. 2  home. Within ilearn we use the following programs: 3. Math XL: is a powerful online homework, tutorial, and assessment system that accompanies Pearson Education’s textbooks in mathematics or statistics. Since 2001, MathXL, along with MyMathLab and MyStatLab, have helped over 5 million students succeed at more than 1,850 colleges and universities. MathXL engages students in active learning—it’s modular, self-paced, accessible anywhere with Web access, and adaptable to each student’s learning style—and instructors can easily customize MathXL to better meet their students’ needs. 4. Differentiated Instruction : Teachers use student data to tailor tasks and products to address students’ areas of weakness and build upon their strengths. Teachers use manipulatives to access multiple entry points. 5. Title I AIS Afterschool and Saturday Academy: Small group differentiated 3  Science All AIS services are determined by pre and post unit assessments. Teachers meet in instruction after school. Improves students’ math skills by utilizing direct, explicit instruction and modeling of mathematical processes. Students practice and apply these strategies and skills by completing and modeling several levels of mathematical problems, viewing interactive multimedia, and writing out processes and reasoning. An intervention program designed to reinforce strategies and test taking skills. 6. Math Solutions : has stressed the use of higher order cognitive mathematics problems over root memorization. The focus moves away from a different topic each day into work that connects many concepts into a more complex and rigorous problem. In the classroom, math teachers can utilize open-ended math questions, projects, and discovery-based activities in order to make deeper connections within the math. 1. S hared Reading : an instructional approach in which the teacher explicitly models the strategies 1. Whole Class 2. Whole Class 1. This is done during the school day. 4  PLCs and use a looking at student work protocol to analyze students’ strengths and weaknesses and subsequently place students in intervention groups. MOSL baseline assessments include the NYC performance tasks and the items skills analysis from those are used to determine AIS services as well. 3. Whole Class 4. Small Group 5. Whole Class 2. This takes place during the school day. 3. This takes place during the school day. 4. This takes place during the school day, after school and on weekends. 5. This takes place during the school day. and skills of proficient readers. With this instructional technique, students have an opportunity to gradually assume more responsibility for the reading as their skill level and confidence increase. Shared reading also provides a safe learning environment for students to practice the reading behaviors of proficient readers with the support of teacher and peers. Shared reading focuses on the introduction of complex text in the subject area. The text is always chosen by the teacher and must be visible to the students. 2. Reciprocal Reading: A reciprocal approach provides students with four specific reading strategies that are actively and consciously used to support comprehension: Questioning, Clarifying, Summarizing, and Predicting. Palincsar (1986) believes the purpose of reciprocal teaching is to facilitate a group effort between teacher and students as well as among students in the task 5  of bringing meaning to the text. 3. Laboratory Period: Provides additional instruction through hands-on activities focusing on NYS Intermediate Level Science Exam performance standards. 4. Urban Advantage: Partnership between NYCDOE and cultural institutions (i.e. American Museum of Natural History, Brooklyn Botanical Gardens) which enables students to explore past and present science-related events and phenomenon; students learn how to use the Scientific Method of Inquiry to investigate a scientific problem of their choice. 5. MSQI: Reading Apprenticeship - addresses strategies to engage students to improve their comprehension of complex texts via the Shared Reading Model (i.e. “talking to the text”). Strategies reinforce reciprocal reading and help students verbalize through student-created Q&R (questioning and responding) activities. 6 1. Whole Class 2. Whole Class 3. Small Group 4. Whole Class and Small Group 1. This is done during the school day. 2. This takes place during the school day. 3. This takes place during the school day. 4. This takes place during the school day. Social Studies All AIS services are determined by pre and post unit assessments. Teachers meet in PLCs and use a looking at student work protocol to analyze students’ strengths and weaknesses and subsequently place students in intervention groups. MOSL baseline assessments include the NYC performance tasks and the items skills analysis from those are used to determine AIS services as well. 1. S hared Reading : an instructional approach in which the teacher explicitly models the strategies and skills of proficient readers. With this instructional technique, students have an opportunity to gradually assume more responsibility for the reading as their skill level and confidence increase. Shared reading also provides a safe learning environment for students to practice the reading behaviors of proficient readers with the support of teacher and peers. Shared reading focuses on the introduction of complex text in the subject area. The text is always chosen by the teacher and must be visible to the students. 2. Reciprocal Reading: A reciprocal approach provides students with four specific reading strategies that are actively and consciously used to support comprehension: Questioning, Clarifying, Summarizing, and Predicting. Palincsar (1986) believes the purpose of reciprocal teaching is to facilitate a group 7  At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) -Teacher recommendation -Student request -Parent request -PPT team request effort between teacher and students as well as among students in the task of bringing meaning to the text. 3. Guided Reading is small-group reading instruction designed to provide differentiated teaching that supports students in developing reading proficiency. The small group model allows children to be taught in a way that is intended to be more focused on their specific needs, accelerating their progress. 4. MSQI: Reading Apprenticeship – addresses strategies to engage students to improve their comprehension of complex texts via the Shared Reading Model (i.e. “talking to the text”). Strategies reinforce reciprocal reading and help students verbalize through student-created Q&R (questioning and responding) activities. 1. Guidance Counselor: One to One and small group counseling to address students’ behavior or social issues that may impact on academics; Crisis intervention, conflict resolution 1. Small group or one to one 1. During the school day. 2. Small group or one to one. 2. During the school day 3. Small group or one to one. 3. During the school day 8 4. One to One 4. During the school day -Crisis Team request -Safety Team request -Attendance Team request and mediation; Parent conferences and referrals to school, district, and community programs; Career counseling and facilitation of the High School admissions process. At risk counseling provided for 8 th grade holdovers; targeting social and academic issues related to being over age. 2. School Psychologist: One to One counseling to address student’s behavioral or social issues that may impact on academics. Parent consultations and referrals to school, district and community programs Evaluations and recommendations for additional services or programs 3. Social Worker/Mentor Program : Through group and individual counseling, students are given tools to improve their social and psychological functioning to maximize their well-being and academics. Discussions of misbehavior in class, and truancy are provided in both settings. Recommendations of outside counseling 9  and testing for other support services within the DOE are provided. Teachers are also advised on how to cope with students who have issues that are being addressed in therapy. This service is provided by both our DOE social worker and our onsite social workers through NYCID, an outside agency. 4. Health Related at Risk Services provided by the school nurse: Individual nursing assessment and prescribed treatment of students with documented medical conditions Conferences and consultations with parents and physicians regarding the diagnosis and progress of each student’s medical condition. 5. Success Mentoring 0  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 34 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. Students in temporary housing will be supported through our NYCID mental health team. They will conduct weekly check in sessions to determine students' needs both academically and emotionally. STH students will have access to school bags, school supplies and technology. In addition they will receive the first seats in all after school and weekend programs. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 1  N/A 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. N/A 2  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. - 100% of the ENL teachers and ELA teachers are Highly Qualified. - Teachers are provided Professional Development to ensure that they are privy to the most current practices and research. - For those teachers who are not Highly Qualified, i.e. Common Branch under Rule III, we additionally support them with the necessary content training. - We seek additional teachers through recruitment fairs and work with the Office of Teacher Recruitment and Quality to enlist and maintain Highly Qualified teachers. - We utilize and accept Open Market transfers. -The 2015-2016 Advance data including MOTP and MOSL ratings were used to inform professional development topics, make staffing assignment decisions and provide additional support to Ineffective or Developing teachers. -We utilize pprofessional development in the Understanding by Design (UBD) Framework. - Professional development is differentiated for teachers at varying levels. - Collaborative professional development plans are created with teacher input for the whole staff as well as individual subject area departments. -We are a former pilot school with the Office of Teacher Recruitment and Quality and we meet monthly with our Teacher Staffing Support Manager to learn new strategies for on boarding and retention of teachers. Additionally, we are forming teacher teams chaired by an administrator to continue these on boarding and retention practices after the pilot program is over. - We post our anticipated vacancies in the New Teacher Finder as early as possible and host school tours for potential new staff members to ensure we have access to the most qualified candidates. 3  - We meet weekly as a cabinet to discuss teachers’ effectiveness or lack thereof evidenced by observations. -We create action plans to support teachers in need. -We support new teachers with a New Teacher Mentor for 2 years, new teacher orientation and a new teacher buddy system. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). Teacher self assessments, teacher and paraprofessional surveys, Advance data and administrator observations drive the creation of a yearlong professional development calendar that functions as a living document and is updated based on teacher need including alignment to CCSS and Danielson. Use of teacher feedback forms and periodic surveys for a needs assessment snapshot at various points throughout the year. Use of Borough Filed Office team members, individual vendor personnel, lead teachers and administration to deliver high quality professional development in alignment with CCSS and our school’s CEP goals and instructional focus. Release time for teachers and staff to attend outside professional development that is offered from affiliations including but not limited UFT, CSA, DC-37, Urban Advantage, MSQI, CMP3 & Expeditionary Learning. Teacher teams created and trained to use student work and progress as an indicator for professional development needs. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) 4  Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). N/A 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. Teachers collaborate with the administration in the form of the MOSL committee to analyze, discuss and decide on the local measure of student growth as per the Measure of Teacher Effectiveness. Teachers meet in subject teams to create and decide upon assessments on a department wide scale under the supervision of the subject area administrator. There is assessment analyzing meetings built into our professional development plan to give teachers time to discuss data and use it to inform their instruction. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) 508,357.00 0 32,974.00 14,970.00 6,338,911.00 X X X X Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Column B Section Reference(s) All 5 Goals All 5 Goals All 5 Goals All 5 Goals Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, 5  State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.  6   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 7  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. Seth Low IS 96, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Elementary and Secondary School (ESSA) Act, is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students Seth Low IS 96 will support parents and families of Title I students by: ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; 8  ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; 9  ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Elementary and Secondary School Act; ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) School-Parent Compact (SPC) Seth Low IS 96, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Elementary and Secondary School (ESSA) Act, is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement 0  between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Elementary and Secondary School (ESSA) Act; I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; 1  ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Elementary and Secondary School Act Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; 2  II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; III. Student Responsibilities 3  ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 4  Addendum: Community School Partnerships Directions: The Community School (CS) strategy is directly aligned to the Framework for Great Schools. Community Schools bring schools and community partners together and integrate academics, health, youth development, and family engagement to provide students with the tools and opportunities they need to succeed. The Core Services in Community Schools are Expanded Learning Time (ELT), Attendance Supports, Family Engagement, and Health & Wellness. Part 1 – Community School Partnerships Goal(s) How is the CS strategy integrated into academic instruction at your school, and what impact has it had on student academic outcomes? Our CLS work has focused on attendance improvement, mental health, and parent engagement, as the first is mandated under our AIDP grant status, and the last two are our greatest needs as determined by surveys, needs assessments, etc. For a number of reasons, it’s not easy to capture the direct effect that these services have had on academic instruction/student achievement. However, we have been able to make correlations between the students receiving direct services from our CS Mental Health Team and their core course work pass rate. Over 90% of students focused on last year passed all four of their core academic courses. (We are not an ELT/Renewal school.) Indicate the summative goal(s) of the Community School for the 2018-19 school year. Be sure to construct the goal to be SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Realistic, and Time-bound. In the area of attendance, we will craft an Attendance Improvement Cohort selected from among our Tier II & III students, and assign them to Success Mentors. By June 2018 we will raise the average daily attendance (ADA) of at least seventy-five percent of this cohort, and as a result raise course course pass rates and high-school attainment. Cohort will comprise 40-60 students, depending on mentoring caseload. We will also increase the emphasis on improved attendance among students receiving clinical mental health services from our guidance team and from sub-CBO New York Center for Interpersonal Development (NYCID), which is around 75 more students. Other goals include an expansion of medical resources for students and families, to address both physical and mental health needs. Parents have asked for medical resources for themselves and their families that are not dependent on insurance or immigration status, and many families have requested youth mentoring and even clinical social work services in a variety of languages. Our NYCID and guidance teams will continue to see all students referred to them. By June 2018 will add at least 3 partnerships, on-site and/or external, to address a wider spectrum of student and families’ medical needs. Future partners may include Apex for Youth, Atlas DIY Immigrant Youth Center, the Maimonides Family Counseling Clinic, the Academy of Medical and Public Health Services (who specifically provide health and wellness care to underserved immigrant communities), and more. In parent engagement, we will continue to identify and develop parent leaders and interpreters. Our partnerships with AIDP and CLS allow us to recruit parents as interpreters for a set schedule of meetings, events, workshops, and office hours. By June 2018 we will recruit 3 new parent leaders and develop their confidence and leadership skills by training them to not only interpret for other parents but also activate families as stakeholders whose input is necessary to our success. This will be evidenced by their effective execution of supporting parents. We are proud to pay a modest stipend to these volunteers because we understand that language and leadership skills have value, and that English proficiency has a direct positive impact on earnings especially for newly arrived immigrants in New York City (2017 Preliminary Management Report for the Mayor's Office of Immigrant Affairs). We have set aside AIDP grant funding for up to 5 parent interpreters to work with us throughout the school year. Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Community School Annual Goal(s): 5  How will achieving your Community School Goal(s)--in Expanded Learning Time (ELT), Attendance Supports, Family Engagement, and Health & Wellness--support your academic goals for students? There is ample research to support our belief that improved parent communication, reduced student absences, and improved physical and mental health are instrumental to improving academic outcomes. Students who are sick, depressed, socially isolated, economically disadvantaged, or simply not in the classroom will struggle against far greater odds. Each of our students have goals in each subject area. Specifically, in ELA and Math, they have a year long goal and smaller quarterly goals that are parts needed to ultimately meet their long term goal. Improved parent communication will help ensure that parents and teachers are working as partners to ensure students’ academic success. This includes making sure that opportunities for after school and weekend support are taken advantage of by students and supporting parents in helping their children practice at home. The work we do to improve student attendance has proved to result in increased student achievement in course work. Quite simply, the more we can get them in class the more they will learn and master. Lastly, improving students physical and mental health allows them to concentrate more on their academics. It improves their ability to focus and follow through on tasks resulting in higher core pass rates and proficiency. Part 2 – Community School Partnerships Core Services Action Plan Part 2a. Identify the Community-based Organization (CBO) partnerships that you will develop in ELT, Attendance Supports, Family Engagement, and Health & Wellness, their target student population(s), and scope of the services provided. As well as supporting schools’ supportive environment and attendance work, CBOs should be helping to support your school’s instructional focus. CBO Partnership Attendance UFT CLS: Success Mentors who are trained to assess student and family needs and implement attendance improvement strategies, including setting individualized goals and connecting families to available support systems and resources. Parent Engagement UFT CLS & FACE: To recruit bi-lingual parents as interpreters for a set schedule of meetings, events, workshops, and office hours. Multi-lingual family engagement team will staff an on-site "parent center" OACE Target Population At-risk and Chronically Absent students (Tiers II & III) who are not receiving clinical counseling services Bi-lingual parents and non-English fluent students, families, and community members. Family members of IS 96, community members, and adult learners in ESL and GED classes Scope of Service SY18-19 SMART Goal Mentorship for attendance improvement By June 2018 we will raise the average daily attendance (ADA) of at least seventy-five percent of this cohort, and as a result raise course course pass rates and high-school attainment. Full-service interpretation, facilitation of parent meetings, and helping to connect families with programs and resources in their preferred languages during school and after-school hours. By June 2018 we will recruit 3 new parent leaders and develop their confidence and leadership skills by training them to not only interpret for other parents but also activate families as stakeholders whose input is necessary to our success. To increase enrollment of parents 6  Health & Wellness NYCID: To provide mental health support to our students and their families/ ELT/Afterschool Parents and other adult community members Students referred by staff as being in need of mental health support. All students Federation of Italian Americans: Beacon Program in both programs for the 17-18 school year. Evening and Weekend ESL and GED courses. To have 2 full time social workers and 2 part time social workers have a case load of 25 students each. Beacon provides after school services to our school community. The services include homework help, sports and other recreational activities. By June 2018 we will service all student referrals given to the team. By October 2017 we will increase the number of students enrolled and actively attending by 20%. Part 3 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 3a. Indicate resources your Community Partnership will leverage to achieve your summative SMART goal(s) and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. The community schools grant will fund the NYCID partnerships, pay parent interpreters and pay for student programs and incentives associated with these goals. Part 3b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) Title I SWP Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century C4E School Achievement X Other Funding Part 3c. Describe how the school will partner with the Lead CBO to do the following: 1. Community Schools are expected to partner with a community-based partner organization (CBO) and together with members of the School Leadership Team, hire a Community School Director. The Director will lead implementation of the asset and needs assessment process, and other critically important coordinating activities. Indicate how you will leverage this aspect of the work. 7  2. 3. 4. Community Schools are expected to personalize the needs of all students, through strategic programming and services, as determined by the asset and needs assessment, and must also offer Expanded Learning Time (ELT) and mental health programming. In completing this section, ensure that you think about how: (1) the right services are provided to the right students and families at the right time; and (2) how you will seamlessly coordinate services with instructional programming happening throughout and outside of the school day. Indicate how you will implement this work, and describe other programming you anticipate to be in place to strengthen this initiative. Community Schools are expected to emerge as Partnership Schools, which are places where parents and families feel welcome, actively participate in the conversation and decision-making around the renewal of their schools, and have many opportunities to advocate for their children. Monthly meetings and Community School Forums engaging families and community stakeholders will be a critical part of this family engagement strategy. Describe how you will implement this aspect of the work. Community School Principals are expected to meet on a weekly basis with their Community School Director, select Assistant Principals, key staff, and other CBOs, to analyze trends in data and case manage individual students. Data tools – including the New Visions Data Sorter - and training will be available for schools to use. Indicate how you will implement this aspect of the work. 1. The CSD oversees Success Mentoring efforts, leads SST meetings, recruits and organizes parent interpreters, and leads the family engagement team in partnership with the principal and parent coordinator. The CSD also organizes family welcome events and the annual family forum, to collect data and solicit feedback on existing programs and ideas for future services and collaboration. 2.We don’t technically have ELT, but we do have a Beacon afterschool program as part of our partnership with the Federation of Italian-American Organizations (FIAO). Over this summer and into SY 2018, the CSD is leading a team of Beacon stakeholders in performing the NYSAN self-assessment review process in hopes of strengthening the afterschool programming available to families at IS 96. 3.We use our full-time family engagement team, which consists of the CSD, parent coordinator, 1 full-time multi-lingual family assistant, and 2 full-time multi-lingual school aides, altogether serving around 5 of our top languages, to build day-to-day relationships with parents and hear from them directly. Their requests through these daily conversations lead us to implement parent programming in areas such as digital literacy, ESL resources for a variety of schedules, greater mentoring and mental health resources for themselves and their families, information about high school articulation, the implementation of an SHSAT test prep program for 7th and rising 8th graders, and much more. 4.The CSD consults the data sorter regularly, especially in consultation with Success Mentors, to identify challenges and help tailor individual student goals. Data sorter attendance data is also the backbone of SST meetings, along with the professional assessments of the mental health team and counselors. Part 4 – Community School Partnerships Oversight Part 4a. Key Staff and Partners 1. Name and describe the scope of involvement of all community partners working in the school (include partners supporting ELT, counseling, enrichment, etc.) 2. Name the members of your Community School Team and how meetings will be organized and structured to engage all stakeholders and be focused on results. 3. Explain data strategies including the use of the data sorter, and steps that the school will take to ensure that the appropriate interventions are provided to the right students 1. New York Center for Interpersonal Development: provides on-site mental health counseling to both groups and individuals, as an elective period and throughout the school day as needed. Federation of Italian-American Organizations: acts as the fiscal agent and programmatic partner for DYCD funding to carry out the afterschool Beacon program. Office of Adult and Continuing Education: Already provides ESL and GED/TASC 8  test prep; we would like to expand to include a Citizenship class and more professional/technical job preparation training. 2. As a member of the Community Learning Schools Initiative with the UFT, our model is slightly different. We operate with an advisory board made up of students, teachers, admin, parents, partners, and diverse other stakeholders. Complete list of names is available as a separate document, on request. Monthly meetings with this board are usually structured in a task-based way, starting with a community building ice breaker, then reviewing progress of key projects and initiatives in the preceding month, and then agreeing on priorities and assigning tasks for the month ahead, and finally opening the floor to all new business, comments, requests, etc from members and guests. 3. AIDP/Attendance and Student Support Team (SST) meetings will be held bimonthly to review trends, monitor individual student progress, and adjust interventions as needed. Part 4b. Indicate resources needed including human resources, instructional resources, and schedule adjustments to implement the Community School program. If you find 2-5 more Success Mentors with social work backgrounds who speak Spanish, Cantonese, or both, and are willing to work for free and/or course credit at our somewhat remote location in Bensonhurst, please don’t hesitate to send them our way. Part 4c. Timeline for implementation and completion, including start and end dates. 2017-2018 School Year Part 4d. Mental Health Work Plan Separate from this S/CEP, schools will complete a Mental Health Work Plan that will become an addendum to this document. 9  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 0  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: Seth Low’s Title III program will provide supplemental instruction after school, two times a week. The supplemental program will target all ELL and Immigrant students in 6th, 7th and 8th grade. We will target three groups (data driven groups) of students. Those who scored at the Entering and Emerging levels on the spring 2018 NYSESLAT Exam will receive direct support for the acceleration of their language acquisition. Those who have scored the same proficiency level for two or more years in a row and long term ELL students receiving services for more than 4 years will receive direct support within the specific modalities depending on individual needs. Lastly, Transitioning and Expanding ELLs and Immigrant students who scored lower than a 45 on the Degrees of Reading Power exam will receive direct instruction in reading comprehension. The rationale for the program was determined by reviewing the RLAT report in ATS, conferencing with teachers and reviewing the ELA and NYSESLAT data from spring 2017. After careful review of the RLAT report it became evident that the majority of ELL students were either long term ELLs or making little progress toward proficiency. The program will meet on Wednesdays and Thursdays for two hours. The program will run for 30 sessions beginning January 1, 2019 and ending May 9, 2019. The program will begin in January, so that we have ample time to baseline students and so that they will have continuous instruction and support right up until the NYSESLAT exam. Our largest home language populations will be supported by having language paraprofessionals work with groups of students. Instruction will align with ENL/ELA Common Core Learning Standards and the City wide instructional expectations. The program will incorporate using the DRP to assess readability levels and guided reading through LLI to target comprehension deficiencies as well as ThinkCerca to guide student writing and level offered text, Language Power Vocabulary Builder and incorporating materials such as Step by Step and Finish Line New York ELLs which strengthen grammar and increase language acquisition. All of these are supplemental materials not being used during the school day. We will also include the writing process to target strengths and weaknesses found within our Title III program. ThinkCerca, guided reading and other listed strategies are used during the school day and will continue to be used after school but with new text. The ENL teachers will deliver instruction for the Reading, Writing, Listening and Speaking Modalities in small groups based on student proficiency levels and needs. Teachers will maintain students' formative and summative assessment data included in the purchased curriculum on the google drive during the program. We are also exploring options for ENL educational applications as well as programs to be used on Kindle Fire to support students reading skills. Six teachers will be utilized for the Title III program at a cost of $54.34 per hour including fringe. The Title III after school program will support as many as students as possible; we service approximately 260 ENL students currently and project to service 140 of them during the after school program. A school aide will be assigned to after school to maintain attendance records and notify parents using translation services of student absenteeism. All program reminders and notifications will be phoned home in each student's home language using Pupil Path. 1  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: The Continuous Learning Program is a program in which a team of teachers and administrator are working together with other schools to facilitate the needs of ELL students. There are cycles of inquiry based on the problem of practice. The team of teachers and the administrator go to professional learning together. The PD and coaching is administered by the Continuous Learning Program. The teachers and administration then offers professional learning cycles to all teachers to be able to differentiate to meet the needs of our ELLS. The Title III program will focus on implementing differentiation of instruction in the content area classes based on the level of English language proficiency. Teachers will receive staff development on analyzing data on state exams i.e. ELA, NYSESLAT, NYS Math exam, to drive effective instruction. ENL teachers will facilitate staff development by incorporating ELL strategies across the content areas. The teachers are receiving ongoing training in Understanding by Design as well as the Common Core Learning Standards and the city wide Instructional expectations. The intent is to incorporate rigorous instruction throughout the program and to scaffold our ELL students to be college and career ready. The teachers will also engage in professional development provided by Think Cerca to incorporate best practices into their planning. Teachers will engage in monthly department meetings as well as weekly professional learning community meetings where best practices and ENL methodology will be a focal point. The teachers will be receiving professional development regarding ENL push in/pull out model of collaborative instruction and planning. The tentative professional development schedule is as follows: All ENL teachers will receive training by content vendors for the chosen Title III materials as well as, school administration and the FSC. All in house PD agendas and attendance records are maintained in the PD binder in the Principal's Office. All out of the building PD materials are submitted to the Principal upon the teachers return with a completed PD analysis worksheet. 2  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: Parents are offered workshops and participation in extra curricula activities such as Project Boost, The Leadership Program and Urban Advantage. Parents may also take classes, including English classes and GED Classes, through OACE on site at IS 96 to foster the home-school connection. The rationale is to bring parents and students into a venue that they may not have been exposed to otherwise; trips, which are available to all members of the students' family focus on cultural respect and awareness. Parental engagement is an ongoing and daily process that can also be scheduled upon availability and need. Parental contact for events is made in a variety of ways, to include but is not limited to: School Messenger and Talking Points (In home language as designated by the HLIS), back pack notices, mailings, emails (by parent coordinator), etc. Translators are provided for all parent workshops and meetings. As a Community School our focus includes increased parent involvement specifically with the ELL population. We will be working with our new community liaison to provide much needed services to our ELL families. All parent engagement activities require an invitation translated in home languages, agenda and attendance sheet that are submitted and kept on file with the Parent Coordinator. Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ 22220 Budget Category Budgeted Amount Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits)  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental. Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. 3  Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ 22220 Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL 4  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 21 School Name Seth Low I.S. 96 Borough Brooklyn School Number 096 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Erin Lynch Coach Cynthia Sow ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Norma Aulet Teacher/Subject Area Helen Torres Teacher/Subject Area Kathi Andino Related-Service Provider Esther Elbogen Superintendent Isabel DiMola Assistant Principal Helen Brock Coach type here School Counselor Kinyetta Hunter Parent Shamila Nawaz Parent Coordinator Jahaira Holguin Field Support Center Staff Member Nelly Cortes Other (Name and Title) type here C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 0 6 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 775 5 Total number of ELLs 257 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 33.16%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 1 2 3 4 Lang. N/A Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? The ENL teachers will be using a lexile assessment from Inside along with the DRP for initial and periodic assessments. The results from these assessments will provide teachers with the reading levels of the students so proper placement in classes and necessary interventions can be provided. Formative end of unit assessments and curriculum embedded on demand writes also allow teachers to monitor student growth and provide appropriate scaffold within lessons where needed. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? We are using the Professional Learning Community (PLC) model to build teacher content knowledge and expertise in targeted areas in need for student achievement by analyzing student work, identifying targeted areas for improvement, and applying current instructional practices that support targeted areas. 6  3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? Summative assessments that are being used by IS 96 are Performance Series and ELL Periodic Assessments. Teachers will use this data to drive common planning meetings resulting in differentiated lessons and activities for ENL instruction in the classrooms. Progress is measured by looking at individual student growth after the baseline and mid point assessment. In addition at these times teachers will look at how students scored on individual standards, skills and modalities to uncover students' areas of need. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? Based on the information gathered from these assessments, we have set up Integrated classroom models, additional pull out periods, as well as additional pull out periods for long term ENLs. In the integrated model, two teachers provide the students with small group instruction based on need. These teachers will also provide 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] IS 96 is an MSQI (Middle School Quality Initiative) school. Through this initiative, we test students three times a year using the Degrees of Reading Power (DRP) exam. This exam will provide us with the students' lexile level and will help us determine the proper interventions needed. If we deem it necessary to provide further testing for tiered intervention, we use one of the Wilson assessments to determine the exact intervention needed. We implement RTI in several ways. For students requiring the most support we offer exclusive pull out to deliver programs such as Wilson and Wilson just words 4-5 times a week. In addition we provide Tier II intervention by embedding intervention period into students designated ENL and ELA class periods. The initial data described above helps us determine which students need intervention. Progress monitoring data is then used to determine the success of the RTI choices made and indicates changes to a students' individual described plan. At risk ELLS are supported during elective periods by licensed ENL teachers, after school during AIS and Title III. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. Analyzing the NYSESLAT for data patterns across proficiency levels, we have found that, across grades, students are making the most progress at the entering and emerging levels. Once students reach the transitioning level, their progress stagnates. 40% of students did not make a performance level jump on the 2017 NYSESLAT. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? Our plan for the next school year is to meet our ENL students where they are and continue to have them making progress in all strands and in their core subjects. We are programming to create ENL teacher teams across the core subject areas. For example, the same ENL teacher will be paired with the same class and same teacher in an ELA, Science, and/or Social Studies class for all periods. The goal is to have consistency across the board for the students as well as the teachers and to allow teachers to get to know their students completely to ensure they are meeting all of their needs. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. 7  As per CR Part 154.2, respective grade level classes with designated ENLs are programmed and grouped as follows: Entering/Emerging - 8 periods/week (360 min), 4 periods push-in (ENL teacher) and 4 periods pull-out (paralleled with ELA); Transitioning - 4 periods/week (180 min) push-in (paralleled with ELA, Science and /or Social Studies); Expanding - 4 periods/week (180 min) push-in (parallelled with ELA, Science and/or Social Studies. They are grouped homogeneously in each grade level by proficiency level in the same class. The integrated model is implemented in Science, SS and ELA by pairing an ENL teacher with a content teacher for all required periods. The expectation of planning and support is shared and time is allocated for that. b. TBE program. If applicable. N/A c. DL program. If applicable. N/A 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? The ENL Coordinator and the ENL teachers review all data from the RNMR, LAB-R and NYSESLAT Exam in order to identify each student’s proficiency level to ensure that mandated instructional minutes are provided. As per CR-Part 154.2, Entering and Emerging ENLs receive 360 minutes of ENL instruction per week. Transitioning students receive 180 minutes of ENL instruction and 180 minutes of ELA instruction per week. Entering and Emerging ENL classes are paralleled with ELA classes. This allows ENL teachers to provide self-contained ELA instruction at that time. Transitioning, Expanding, and Commanding ENLs are grouped together in respective grade level classes to allow ENL teachers to push-in during content area instruction (ELA, Science and/or Social Studies). 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. Content area instruction is delivered in English using ELA methodology and instructional strategies. ENL teachers push-in to content area classes to assist entering and emerging ENLs. Instruction is aligned with ENL, and NYS ELA Learning standards. To assist in making content more comprehensible, ENLs are provided with bilingual dictionaries and/or glossaries. ENLs are also paired with other students who speak the same preferred language and have a strong command of English. These students act as “buddies” and work collaboratively with their partners to improve content area understanding. Currently, the INSIDE program from National Geographic is being used; benchmark, formative and summative assessments are used to gauge acquisition of the English language. The ENL teachers work in collaboration with the General Education teachers to differentiate the material and scaffold instruction to ensure that it is age and content appropriate. In ELA, the Expeditionary Learning curriculum is used with vocabulary front-loaded and pre/post unit assessments used for intervention groups on an on-going basis. Cognates are used to translate English with student's preferred language. PowerSpeak program specifically used for Latino subgroup. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? I.S 96 does not currently have a TBE/DL program so we are not using formative or summative assessments specifically for a TBE/DL programs. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status Differentiation of Instruction for all ELL subgroups includes: embedding definitions and language in content areas, using real world artifacts and visual aids to support comprehension, drawing on student background to activate prior knowledge, and the 8  use of tiered questioning to support the development of higher order thinking in English. a. SIFE students: Content area and ENL teachers meet and conference about the individual achievement levels and needs of the students. Students who appear to be falling far behind are referred to the School Assessment Team for evaluation. b. Newcomers (0-3 years): Newcomers are serviced in a "Welcome Class" and are serviced by teachers that are dually certified. In addition, we use parallel programs so that students can be integrated based on readiness into general education classes with ENL services. c. Developing: Teachers use the workshop model and cooperative learning techniques in the content areas to provide assistance to ELL students. In addition, Transitioning ELLs are programmed into a parallel ELA class taught by a licensed ELL teacher to help them with language acquisition. Students are regularly assessed to determine their progress. ENL teachers work closely with content area teachers to scaffold instruction. ENL teachers also schedule planning time to meet the needs of their students when they push-in to content area classes. d. Long-term ELLs: Use of adapted literature to ensure authentic and high quality reading. Use of leveled non-fiction libraries to provide high interest material at students’ present reading level. Content area teachers participate in Professional Learning Community meetings and conference with ENL teachers to scaffold subject area material. All material is differentiated but rigorous to insure students meet current state standards in all core subjects. Individual needs are assessed by teachers through the Inquiry process. Teachers use data inquiry to monitor progress and refer students to School Assessment Team if needed. e- Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status: Teachers use the workshop model and cooperative learning techniques in the content areas to provide assistance to ELL students. Use of adapted literature to ensure authentic and high quality reading. Use of leveled non-fiction libraries to provide high interest material at students’ present reading level. Content area teachers participate in Professional Learning Community meetings and conference with ENL teachers to scaffold subject area material. All material is differentiated but rigorous to insure students meet current state standards in all core subjects. Individual needs are assessed by teachers through the Inquiry process 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? ELLs identified as having special needs: These students’ needs are addressed in a manner reflecting their IEPs. All content area materials are grade appropriate and adjusted to meet their level of learning ability. Research-based MSQI initiatives such as Word Generations emphasize content vocabulary throughout core lessons help accelerate English language acquisition. Smartboards and the use of computers fosters the learning process. Specific materials are geared for intervention groupings i.e. vocabulary enrichment, phonics, and reading comprehension. Preferred language materials are presented in concert with English. The RDMR report is run in ATS as well as the RDGR, RLER, RLAT and all IVR calls are made and confirmation numbers registered to ensure proper servicing of all SWD ELL's. All teachers, general education as well as special education have been trained to use SESIS and all those students whose IEP's are still reflected in CAP receive hard copies of the IEP modifications. If a students IEP mandates bilingual instruction, a language para-professional is provided to that student throughout all content area classes to ensure full compliance of all needs. The IEP Coordinator along with the Assistant Principal monitor IEP mandates to ensure full compliance. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? Targeted intervention programs in ELA , Math and other content areas include the following: • Extended day small group instruction 2x a week • Academic Intervention Services in ELA and Math • 6, 7th grade CFY individualized on-line learning programs • Small group instruction for long-term ELLs addressing the deficient skills as determined by the NYSESLAT Exam • IReady and Waggle, a online literacy program that uses non-fiction articles to improve reading and writing • Title III after-school program that focuses on literacy skills All students with disabilities are mainstreamed as much as possible; to include, but not limited to, gym, lunch, mainstreaming and reevaluating IEP's where necessary to provide a least restrictive environment. All students regardless of disability are provided a choice of electives, which meet on a daily basis. 9  8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. Long term and Advanced ELL students are being targeted for writing intervention as well as an intensive look at Reading/Writing throughout the content areas; which is where our students seem to struggle the most. The students are also provided Push-In ENL support in the content areas as well as glossaries/dictionaries and native language novels that support language acquisition. SWDs who are also an ENL student receive all mandates described in their IEP. ENL students are also provided reading/AIS support as part of their elective choice. Certain ENL/SWD classes are also using IReady and Waggle in conjunction with their ENL and ELA curriculum. The school has implemented Word Generation, a program designed to support language acquisition, which is being infused throughout all content areas so that content specific vocabulary will become more familiar and accessible to all students including ENLs. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? For the upcoming school year, we are training staff on the use of various individualized computer based programs: iLearn, Aventa, IReady and Waggle. Teachers will be using a DVD program will provide students with pictures to represent each word of a reading passage. Teachers can also use this to provide word banks for students in their lessons. We are also looking into utilizing an online vocabulary tool to support ELLs with academic language. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? We have not had a bilingual class at Seth Low. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. All ELL students are invited to attend after-school programs housed at Seth Low: FIAO Beacon Center, CHAMPS, Title III, Specialized High School Prep, Regents Prep and and all other academic intervention programs. We offer many family fun nights where all students are invited and where translation services is offered in various languages. FIAO Beacon and CHAMPS meet during the week and on the weekends. The Title III and Intervention programs meet during the week. Funding, which is consolidated falls in part under Title III allocations as well as grants that are received for the various programs. The goal of the programs is to enrich the students overall school experience. All applications and notices sent home are translated into several languages. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. The instructional materials used to support ELL students include: SMART Boards, lap tops, Inside Book Series, adapted novels, PowerSpeak Program, Kindles, Chrome Books, native language glossaries and novels written in native languages. All materials are leveled according to the subgroups and any applicable materials are used throughout the content areas. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Home language is assessed using the Home Language Survey completed upon entering our school. Home language support in the ENL program includes: home language libraries, home language glossaries, home language peer support in the classrooms, home language support from staff members. Parent letters are sent in home languages. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. Service support corresponds to ELL student ages and grade levels. Students are provided independent readers at their readability level and teachers scaffold instruction to be sure that all students have entry points to assure that all students engage with all material that is appropriate for both content and age level. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? We are co-located with a charter school, Success Academy, therefore we have separate resources. 0  16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). Summer orientations are held each August to welcome and assist newly enrolled ENL students. At these orientations, these students meet various staff members and are introduced to the school environment during walk-through tours. This helps acclimate the students so they are more comfortable when school begins. Students are also when possible, "buddied" with a same language partner to aid in the transition. During the school year as new ELL students arrive our parent coordinator and a member of our language access team acquaint themselves with the new ELL student and their family and provide transition support throughout the year. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? Presently, the only language elective offered to ELLs is Spanish. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? N/A Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? This year the staff will be provided with intensive professional development with a focus on Differentiated Instruction, Writing, and Effective Strategies for English Language Learners such as, schema building, contextualization and modeling. Professional development will be ongoing and coordinated by the Instructional Team, which includes the Principal, Assistant Principals, Literacy Coach, English Language Learner/Students with Disabilities Coordinators and Lead teachers from each professional learning community. This team will work together throughout the school year to combine ideas on effective planning and strategies to provide students with an optimal learning environment for academic achievement. The Center for Educational Innovation-PEA will provide extensive support and workshops on site. Consultants will work with teachers to improve instruction and set goals for ELL students using rubrics adapted from Common Core State Standards as well as NYS ENL Standards. Consultants will also work closely with school administrators offering support on various levels. Multiple opportunities will be provided for turn-key training throughout the school year. In order to build capacity in the building, we will use model classrooms for intra-visitations where teachers can view best practices demonstrated by their colleagues. As teachers attend workshops outside of the school building, venues will be scheduled where they are able to share information with their peers. Small teams of teachers will be involved in the on-going process of analyzing student work. Focused classroom walkthroughs will provide feedback to inform staff of the effectiveness or shortcomings of specific classroom strategies that have been implemented. Support will be provided by staff at every level to ensure the academic success of this student population. This year's workshops will include topics such as: *Integrated Co- Teaching Model *Scaffolding of Instruction * Types of English Language Learners * Differentiated Instruction for English Language Learners * Examining the Strands of the NYSESLAT Exam * Differentiating Writing 1  * Differentiating Reading * Using Rubrics to monitor the progress of English Language Learners (integrating . 2. All teachers including ENL teachers have and will continue to have ongoing training in Common Core. ENL teachers attend ELA department meeting weekly to ensure that they too are aligning their lesson to the Common Core. The content area teachers are sent to professional development through the MSQI Initiative and CEI-PEA. Additionally during department meetings and common planning content area teachers meet and plan with the ESL teachers. The ENL teachers support and share best practices with them so that they can differentiate and plan accordingly to meet the needs of ENL students while aligning to the Common Core. All non pedagogical staff engage in Professional Learning with the ENL team each year in regard to the registration and transition process and take part in the same learning as the pedagogical staff as it pertains to their level of interaction with students. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. All teachers will be provided support to help transition English Language Learners from elementary school to middle school with the availability of bilingual books, brochures and culture training in the dominant language groups in the school. Sensitivity training will be provided by the guidance counselor to foster teachers to encourage and motivate English Language Learners. Research based methods will be explored to help teachers identify the individual and diverse needs of English language Learners academic achievement along with their social and emotional well being. All teachers will be provided the opportunity to receive 7.5 hours of comprehensive Jose P. training during full day professional development days, weekly common preparation periods as well as during the monthly after-school team meetings. The training will be coordinated by the Seth Low Instructional Team and/or out sourced professional development consultants. All Jose P. training will be facilitated by an ENL certified consultant. Please see a sample agenda for a full day workshop below. I. Greetings II. ELL Identification III. Ell Data Overview & Analysis: What does the Data Tell Us? IV. Break V. Overview of Learning Standards for ENL VI. Lunch VII. ENL Strategies Across the Content Areas The activities described above meet the 15% requirement. More than 50% of professional learning is done in departments which offers them more than the 50% required time. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? School open houses and parent-teacher conferences; sixth grade parent orientation event; Community Learning Schools family and community forums; PTA meetings; Parent Workshops, field trips, and family dinners; Math & Science Fair Night; Attendance Teacher and Family Assistant visits; Guidance hearings. For all parent events, we use our in-house family engagement team. This team was purposefully and thoughtfully created by hiring family assistants & school aides at the discretion of the principal and the school's budget. Members have been hired not only for multi-lingual abilities, but also for family engagement, community building, administrative, and logistical skills. This team is enormously valuable and forges one-on-one personal relationships built on trust and family empowerment. Our biggest gains in parent engagement in the past 2 years have been at the hands of this very skilled team of full-time staff. We also have a large number of paraprofessionals who are multi-lingual and do both translation and interpretation for us 2  outside of their hours of direct student service. With some advance planning, we are able to staff registration/informational tables and provide personal interpretation services to both parent groups and individuals in about seven languages. All students are required to have a goal in each of the 4 modalities and that in conveyed to parents by teachers and their children during the individual parent meetings. These goals are overarching in all content areas. Assessment data is used to convey progress to parents when discussing student goals. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. All parents are encouraged to join the PTA. All parents are invited to attend monthly PTA meetings. The Parent Coordinator holds workshops throughout the school year that ELL parents are invited to. Parents are encouraged to join in the Family Fun nights at Seth Low, where translation services are provided in a variety of languages as well as written communication in the home languages of our students. Any written communication that is not available in the home language also has the translation blurb attached to the communication as well as translation services via telephone are always readily available. Seth Low also to send home any and all communicates via telephone in the child's preferred home language. . Through our partner programs such as FIAO Beacon, we are able to offer adult ENL classes to the community at large. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. N/A 3 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Erin Lynch, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 4  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: Seth Low IS 96 School DBN: 21k096 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Erin Lynch Title Principal Helen Brock Assistant Principal Jahaira Holguin Parent Coordinator Norma Aulet ENL/Bilingual Teacher Welvy Yai Yuen Parent Danielle Blickhahn/ENL Teacher/Subject Area Alison Asfazadour Teacher/Subject Area Norma Aulet Dierdre Cooney Coach Coach Kinyetta Hunter School Counselor Isabel DiMola Ronny Rodriguez Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 5  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 21K096 School Name: Seth Low Superintendent: Isabel DiMola The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this Jahaira Holguin Parent Coordinator n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Yes n/a n/a n/a Yes n/a n/a n/a * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. HLIS intake done by licensed pedagogue (i.e. ENL teacher); Because of need for "instant" translation services, parent-orientation video is shown by the Parent Coordinator (LAC) at the time of initial visit and administered in parent's preferred language. ATS "flags" are noted; Emergency Contact cards are available in every language. Parent Survey and Program Selection form available in preferred language. 6  2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral English Chinese Spanish Russian Albanian Armenian Arabic Bengali Burmese Croatian Georgian Italian Moldavian Polish Tajik Urdu Ukranian Uzbek Vietnamese 573 227 141 151 3 1 29 2 1 1 5 5 4 0 4 13 4 32 1 46.55 18.44 14.13 12.27 0.24 0.08 2.36 0.16 0.08 0.08 0.41 0.41 0.32 0 0.32 1.06 0.32 2.6 0.08 505 227 142 160 7 2 32 2 1 0 5 5 0 2 6 21 4 36 1 41.02 27.01 15.35 13 0.57 0.16 2.6 0.16 0.08 0 0.41 0.41 0 0.16 0.49 1.71 0.32 2.92 0.08 7  3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. Arabic, Uzbek, and Urdu are our next most populous language groups after those listed above. All of them are less than 10% of our total parent contact records. Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families Parents Bill of Rights (in preferred language), Discipline Code, Grade Expectations, Parent/Teacher Conferences, Medical Forms (i.e. 504s), Title I and Title III afterschool programs, NYSTP dates. Translation "blurb" on all correspondence; welcome banners in all languages; Urban Advantage (science and NYC cultural institutions partnership) flyers in all languages; telephone translation services and electronic translation devices. Sept - June (as students as are admitted) Sept./Nov/March/May PT Conferences November - Title III permission slips. Sept-June for informational flyers as needed. Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. For DOE mandated materials, we try to use the official translations as much as possible, especially where they are conveniently available for printing online through the DOE portal. In cases where official translations are not available or are in a non-served language, we are forced to distribute in English and ask parents to respond back to us with any questions. In many cases the students themselves are the best communicators with their families in their preferred language, so we may ask the student to verbally explain at home or provide interpretation at a face-to-face parent meeting. If a special communication tool exists, such as our WeChat app chat group for Chinese-speaking parents, one of our language team will share a photograph of the English language form or flyer and provide a simple explanation of the contents. 8  n/a n/a n/a For non-mandated materials and the most important parent engagement events, we use a special family engagement team made up of our bilingual parent coordinator and several bilingual staff members and volunteer parent interpreters we have cultivated over several years. Using basic word processing software, we combine simple translations into a one-page invitation or informational sheet about parent-teacher conferences, workshops, student field trips, fairs and festivals, family dinners, and other family-facing activities. n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide School open houses and parent-teacher conferences; sixth grade parent orientation event; Community Learning Schools family and community forums; PTA meetings; Parent Workshops, field trips, and family dinners; Math & Science Fair Night; Attendance Teacher and Family Assistant visits; Guidance hearings. Sept - June - 1 Saturday/month Parent Workshop Sept/Nov/March/May PT Conferences Sept - June as needed for trips, dinners, home visits for specific target individuals interpretation service(s)? For all parent events, we use our in-house family engagement team. This team was purposefully and thoughtfully created by hiring family assistants & school aides at the discretion of the principal and the school's budget. Members have been hired not only for multi-lingual abilities, but also for family engagement, community building, administrative, and logistical skills. This team is enormously valuable and forges one-on-one personal relationships built on trust and family empowerment. Our biggest gains in parent engagement in the past 2 years have been at the hands of this very skilled team of full-time staff. We also have a large number of paraprofessionals who are multi-lingual and do both translation and interpretation 9  n/a n/a n/a for us outside of their hours of direct student service. With some advance planning, we are able to staff registration/informational tables and provide personal interpretation services to both parent groups and individuals in about seven languages. n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. We utilize the text messaging service we have that allows us to send messages to parents translated into their preferred languages. Additionally, we have many staff members that speak multiple languages that can call and interpret the emergency to the parents. If the language needed cannot be provided by a staff member in the school, we utilize the DOE translation services number. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Teachers will be given professional development around the rules and regulations regarding translations during conferences. Teachers will be provided with the phone number for DOE over the phone interpreter services to use during parent teacher conferences as well as during parent outreach time on Tuesdays. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) The Welcome Poster is displayed in main entrance lobby; the Parents' Bill of Rights is backpacked home and extras are available in main office; the Parents Guide to Language Access is distributed by Parent Coordinator (i.e. initial visit/registration; parent workshops). The Parent Resource Center is located in the guidance suite adjacent to the Parent Coordinator's (LAC) office. All notification documents can be found at the Translation and Interpretation Unit's intranet site: http://intranet.nycboe.net/SchoolSupport/translationandinterpretationunit. In addition to the official mandated communications, we are also constantly working to normalize the experience of 0  non-English-speaking parents and to make our service to them so smooth and seamless that it will increasingly resemble the level of service received by English-speakers. Having full-time family engagement specialists in Spanish and Chinese is the primary method of showing parents first-hand that their language needs are respected. We also use an innovative technological tool called Talking Points (talkingpts.org), which is a text messaging portal that incorporates preferred language codes from ATS and can translate simple text messages in both directions--from school to parent, and parent to school. The simplicity of the response and translation process has made this tool one of our most valuable resources for parent communication in the 2017 school year. (This is the first year that we have adopted this tool.) We intend to develop text communication resources even further, using this tool or a similar one, because of its simplicity and efficiency. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? We give each parent a Parent Language Survey re: services the school offers and if their needs were met. 1 
