 19K292 School Name: J.H.S. 292 MARGARET S. DOUGLAS Principal: AHMED EDWARDS 2018-19 CEP-CS 1  Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC)   School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information Margaret S. Douglas 292 6, 7, 8 School Number (DBN): 19K292 301 Vermont Street, Brooklyn NY, 11207 718-498-6560 Phone Number: Fax: Ahmed Edwards Aedward3@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): Email Address: Ahmed Edwards Oral Brady Tanya Fleming Isabel Santos Tanya Fleming Good Shepherd Services CBO Representative: District Information Geographical District: 19 Superintendent: Dr.Thomas McBryde, Jr. Superintendent’s Office Address: 557 Pennsylvania Ave, Room 205, Brooklyn NY 11207 Superintendent’s Email Address: Jstallingsharte@schools.nyc.gov Phone Number: 718-240-2700 Fax: 718-345-3327 Field Support Center (FSC) FSC: Brooklyn North Executive Director: Bernadette Fitzgerald Executive Director’s Office Address: 31 Livingston Street,Brooklyn, NY   Executive Director’s Email Address: Phone Number: 718-935-3026 Fax: 718- 935-3362   Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Ahmed Edwards Oral Brady Tanya Fleming Cecelia Harris Isabel Santos N/A N?A Sherrie Ebanks-Velez Tashica Mitchell Jose Riveria Cecelia Harris Goldie Baldwin Janet Collins *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/   Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/   Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with   the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement   Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? The mission of JHS 292 is to create a professional learning community that embraces each student’s individual talents and maximizes their potential. Our goal is to provide every student with the knowledge and skill necessary in preparation for college and career readiness. In pursuing this mission, JHS 292 students will be provided with rigorous instruction, aligned to the New York State Common Core learning standards. Our programs will assist in preparing students for higher education while developing their sense of responsibility and building self-esteem. To accomplish this mission the school will provide a strong and safe academic environment for all stakeholders while simultaneously providing them with the tools necessary to achieve our goals.   2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. Margaret S. Douglas, JHS 292 is home to 580 students in the sixth, seventh, and eighth grades. In order to provide exceptional educational opportunities that service our students, members of the administration and staff work collaboratively to develop curriculum and lesson plans to target their needs by class, in groups and individually. Encouraging our students to achieve success takes commitment from administrators, guidance counselors, teachers, and parents, who work side by side on academics and life experiences to further their growth and encourage them to become life-long learners. This is done by the implementation and sustenance of mentoring groups such as the Ambi-Sisters (Ambitious), Man-Up Mentoring program for our young men, and the Student Council. These groups, along with our after school programs, 21 st Century and Good Shepherd, focus on fostering leadership potential, community service and helping students to gain the world view that they need, thus, broadening their horizons so that they may compete in an ever changing, complex society. Nurturing and mentoring our students is embedded in the culture of JHS 292. Our school is a pillar in our community. Aware of the many socio-economic issues that plague our students, we strive to provide them with as much financial and emotional help as we can; as they continue to demonstrate a sense of compassion. As a result, our students conduct many fund raising ventures that, in keeping with the saying, “charity begins at home”’ support students that are underprivileged, then contribute to charities such as “St. Jude’s Hospital” and “The Veterans Association” These programs assist in preparing students for a higher education while developing their sense of responsibility and building self-esteem. Continuing the spirit of excellence, we have a Specialized High School program that gives students the opportunity to attend schools with the academic rigor that will prepare them to compete in an international market. For the 2014-2015 school year, we had 13 students who were accepted into Specialized High schools such as Brooklyn Technical High School and Stuyvesant High School. We also host the Chancellor’s DREAM SHSI Program, which prepares students form Districts 18, 19 and 23, for the Specialized High School Exam. At the same time, JHS 292 provides our own Specialized High School Institute to prepare our students for the exam starting from the 7 th grade. Additionally, our eighth grade students have taken the Regents High School examinations in Algebra 1, Living Environment and US History and Government, and have achieved a 95% pass rate. In order to educate the whole child, we offer courses in performing arts. Courses are available in technology, robotics, photography, graphic design, martial arts, visual arts, fitness, and chess. Modern Dance, Robotics and drumming are available in our after school program. Building partnerships with corporate America and Community Based Organizations is a continuous process. 21 st Century has partnered with us to provide our students with a blend of academics and the arts in our after-school program. They work with all stakeholders by providing leadership skills such as financial literacy, to students during the day and professional development to our teachers through the Center for Integrated Teacher Education. (CITE) Intermediate School 292 integrates academics, the arts and community service to nurture and ultimately produce citizens worthy of consideration in the local, international and global market. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. A special population at Margaret S. Douglas Middle School that we would like to offer special attention to students that are hold over 6th 7th and 8th grade students. We classify our over-aged & under-credited students as being two or more years behind their prescribed grade level. These students encompass a number of demographics throughout the building (e.g., SWDs and ENL students). Many of these students are caught in a vicious cycle of academically destructive behavior (e.g., walking hallways, missing class, disrespectful behavior, failure to complete assignments). Based on a needs assessment and the demographics of the 292 building our population will be made of African American, Hispanic and Yemeni students. Many of the perspective students struggle academically based on their reading and math levels. Furthermore, many are dealing with a lack of guidance in their life outside of the 292 building. In some isolated instances students are struggling with body image and self-esteem issues. We also seek to engage our court involved youth that develop their social and cultural capital or have not had the targeted to support to take academic risks. Moreover, been given the opportunity apply that knowledge in an academic setting. Because many of these students are disengaged, they account for many of our incident reports in OORS. To support these students, the 292 faculty and staff seek to establish an after-school program that prepares students for the rigors of 0  high school and high school Regents Exams. Additionally, placing emphasis on goal setting, college and career planning, introducing students to Career and Technical training. This target population would be matched with teachers that have proven record of positively impacting student out comes in literacy, numeracy and building students’ academic vocabulary. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. The element in which Margaret S. Douglas Middle School made the greatest statistical progress as it relates to the Framework for Great Schools was Trust. A great deal of time and energy went into making sure that all stakeholders had a voice and felt they were heard. Moreover, in prior school surveys it was documented that only 32% of staff members felt they trusted their colleagues or their colleagues had the school’s best interest at heart. This growth was evidenced on the school environment survey for 2017-18 that pointed to an increase in the trust between colleagues in the 292 building. For the 2018-19 academic year we will continue to build on that foundation of trust by placing greater emphasis on developing and streamlining a formalized inter-visitations as we work to build collaboration in our teacher teams. This collaboration will also have an impact on school wide instruction, where teachers will have an opportunity to see best practices throughout the school. In addition to maintaining a level of trust with the staff, greater emphasis will be paid to developing greater trust with parents through a greater emphasis on parental/family engagement. As the demographics of the community surrounding JHS 292 shifts, it is import that we as a school adjust to those shifts through culturally responsive measures to contact and engage our parents in a meaningful way. Much of that work will revolve around how we shift the way information is disseminated to families about events and workshops taking place at JHS 292. 1  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 19K292 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 06,07,08 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 567 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 58 59 7 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 38 37 5 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 94.0% % Attendance Rate 92.6% % Reduced Lunch 14.6% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 1.6% 30.0% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 3.0% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 2.02 2% 2% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 34.4% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A YES N/A NO YES Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A NO N/A NO NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A NO N/A N/A NO High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 41 41 89.0% 0.7% 24.5% 48.5% 16.8% 1.8% 2 26% 7.5 29.8% 20% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No YES YES N/A NO YES NO YES N/A NO NO NO N/A N/A N/A NO N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. With regards to rigorous instruction, our strengths are designed well prepared lessons. As evidenced in Advance data for the academic year 2017-18 under Danielson’s Component 1e. Teachers have also developed strong skills in the use of discussion techniques and data driven instruction through the use of MOSL scores and Advance data. However, when looking at student responses on the Student perception survey students have identified engagement as an area of growth. According to the survey only 48% of students felt engaged at JHS 292. In additional, Advance data illustrates that additional time and emphasis should be placed on (3c Student engagement) by way of targeted Professional Development opportunities. Development and implementation of Common Core Aligned Curriculum and Rigorous Unit Plans is coherent and consistent ● Teachers collaborate on unit planning, pacing, and strategies for data driven instruction aligned to curricular units and assessment ● Writing practices that are strong in ELA are not as strong in content areas. There is an opportunity for teachers to meet in horizontal, cross curricular teams to norm expectations for student work and share curricular and instructional practices ● Instruction is data driven and individualized, based on coherent and team normed common core aligned assessments. However data needs to be collected in a more timely manner so that on a departmental level teachers can better recognize trends, strengths, and next steps to action plan accordingly. ● Also, teachers need to use item skills analysis data disaggregated by subgroups to better target subgroups in planning resources and strategies. Both of these practices should result in closing the achievement gap more effectively. Our work in the 2018-2019 year will revolve around but not limited to: ● Writing tasks that are very high interest, but also high rigor. ●Using students' knowledge and lived experiences as the foundation to create strong generalizations about more complicated content and ideas. ● Challenge, confirm or extend the ideas and statements of educators and peers in order to deepen understanding, and deepen in class discussions.  Clear alignment of all stake holders around the school’s core belief that our student learn best through interaction with their peers, teachers, literature, videos and technology. This interaction allows them to create new knowledge. Moreover, to move away from the teacher centered model. 3  ● Increase the level of questioning in all classroom to DOK levels 3 and 4 with and how teachers respond and offer feedback to students' questions. ● Consistently check for understanding and adjust instruction throughout the course of a lesson and make real time adjustments to push students' thinking. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 90% of the lessons delivered will be reflective of high student engagement and facilitation through teachers providing explicit instruction, highlighting common student misconceptions and including multiple assessments of student progress throughout the lesson. As a result, there will be a 5-10% increase in the number of students performing on or above grade level in ELA and Math. 4  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Professional Development on Danielson Framework For Teaching - questioning and discussion techniques; assessment in instruction; and student engagement. Data driven instruction Collaborative teacher team meetings – looking at student work; formative and summative assessments; STEM; thematic units Curriculum which includes modifications for ELL, students with disabilities and students with a Level 1 Proficiency in ELA and Math. Professional Development on Danielson Framework for Teaching - questioning and discussion techniques; assessment in instruction; explicit instruction, student engagement and differentiated instruction. Workshops that support parents understanding of, and participation in instructional initiatives and social/emotional growth such as Parent orientations; Skedula workshops; managing conflict and behavior. All English, science, and social studies teachers will implement three Common Core-aligned writing units that embed expectations for students to develop claims and counterclaims and “to support claims using valid reasoning and relevant and sufficient evidence.” (W.6-8.1) Math teachers will develop units that require students to construct viable arguments for constructed response assessments, as well as critique the reasoning of others through peer assessment. All teachers will teach and reinforce the use of school wide vocabulary and small group instruction strategies, and short answer response strategies in these units. Teachers will support the needs of specific subgroups, in particular ENL, SWD, Black and Hispanic students, by using small group instruction strategies that provide the opportunity to deepen comprehension. Teachers will use timely data to group flexibly, and collaborate to design high quality scaffolds and extensions that target the needs of students. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Teachers 9/2018 6/2019 Administrators, teachers, coaches, CITE. 21 st Century Teachers 9/2018-6/2019 Administrators, teachers, parent coordinator, guidance counselors, 21 st Century, PTA All Students 9/2018- 6/2019 Teachers of all Subjects and students Targeted Subgroups 9/2018- 6/2019 Teachers of all Subjects and students 5  Teachers, students parents 9/2018- 6/2019 Teachers of all subjects and students Teachers, students parents 9/2018- 6/2019 Teachers of all subjects and students N/A Develop individualized student goal setting, progress monitoring and reflection sheets, as well as collection and analysis of data on a school wide tracking spreadsheet that monitors use of evidence as well as implementation of extended written response strategies. Respect for all Presentations, Teacher Team meetings, Professional Development ; School Leadership Team Trust is built through the continual collaboration and inclusion of all stakeholders. We have implemented a professional learning committee and include key staff in our leadership planning meetings. We have an open-door policy for all staff and families that allows for reciprocal communication, problem-solving, and respect for everyone’s perspective. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight.  Families will be invited into the school to during the the second full week of school were they will engage in the following:  Curriculum night(s)  Meeting teachers to get an overview of class structure and expectations  Offered a brief overview of the Danielson Framework  Engage with a sample lesson their children will experience This action/presentation will be implemented with school administration; Parent Coordinator; PTA and SLT Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. This action plan requires the leadership of the Principal, Assistant Principal, and lead teachers. The Principal and Assistant Principals provide support through observations and quality feedback as per the Danielson Framework for Teaching. Lead teachers provide high quality support through teacher team meetings and classroom inter-visitation.  Weekly vertical subject Teacher Team meetings on Mondays to support Professional Development and collaboration on curricular units, inquiry work, assessment development, norming and monitoring.  Weekly horizontal cross subject common Planning periods. 6   After school collaborative planning time using Focus School Set-Aside funds (if available) and Title 1 funds.  Individualized (RTI) instruction programming targeting students scoring a 1 or 2 on NYS common core assessments.  Wednesday, Thursday tutoring and Saturday tutoring targeting students scoring a 1 or 2 on NYS common core assessments and English Language Learners and Students With Disabilities, using Focus School Set-Aside funds (if available) and Title 1 funds.  Principal & Assistant Principal assigned to support of each subject Department, as well as targeted support of Instructional Practice for ENL students and Students With Disabilities  ENL programming to support Native Language access to rigorous Common Core aligned units and Instructional Strategies through Transitional TBE classes  SWD programming to support access for students with IEPs to rigorous Common Core aligned units and Instructional Strategies through flexible programming and ICT support ● Assistant Principal focused on ENL Department and Assistant Principal focused on Special Education Department ● AIS Math and ELA teacher ● AIS and SIT Team ● Enrichment ELA and Applied Math programming Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A X C4E X 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind X Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By January 2019, 75% of Teachers will have shown progress in Danielson elements 3B and 3D as evidenced by observation reports, Advance data, improved discussion in classrooms and deepened rigor in lessons. By January 2019, all educators will have engaged in four sessions of looking at students' written assignments using a specific protocol and a Common Core aligned rubric that is student friendly and grade appropriate. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) 1. Quality of scholar work based on school 2. Educators evaluations/observation through school-wide rubric 3. School-wide Departmental Interim Assessment 4. Student progress based in in class formative assessments Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 7  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? According to the Learning Environment Survey, 73% of our students feel safe in the school. JHS 292 has taken steps to provide Professional Development in cultural awareness and the impact it has on student progress. Respect for all sessions has been implemented through guidance counselors to give students a chance to address their concerns freely without fear of repercussion from staff or other students. During the 2017-18 academic year we have worked diligently to create a supportive environment at JHS 292. Our school has started to grow into a place where our scholars feel safe to take intellectual risks during a lesson free from fear of ridicule. We are starting to implement systems that respond to the root cause of students behave rather than a reactionary approach to undesirable behaviors Through our work with Restorative Justice and student circles we were able to cut our Superintendents suspension rate by 75%. Through the assistance of Tomorrows Leaders, we have begun to look at our overaged and under-credited population by placing greater emphasis on their social and emotional develop. By addressing their needs we found that we were able to mitigate some of the classroom disruptions. We have also adopted The Super Star? Star Bucks ticket system in which we celebrate and reward scholars who are doing the right thing. Our focus is to catch our students doing something great and it is paying huge dividends to focus on and emphasize the positive rather than reacting solely to the things that we don’t want to see happening in the school. Through the Middle School College and Career Access program we were able to work on exposing students to an authentic college experience. This was impactful because it was in line with our goal of raising students social and cultural capital. Through those trips we found that many 292 students were not exposed to life outside of New York City and for many they have not been exposed to life outside of Brooklyn. Our goal is to make the JHS 292 building a more empathetic place where students will take greater risks in the performing arts and athletics. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, the administration and staff will work to provide support for SWD students and entering and emerging ENL students with the development of vocabulary and literacy skills. This will foster a 10% increase in students' achievement on school-wide benchmark assessments in ELA and Math. 8  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Professional Development on cultural awareness and the impact it has on student progress Monthly safety meetings Student council meetings Dedicated Teacher team meetings for ENL teachers Townhall meetings for target groups Student groups such as Ambi-Sisters and Scholars On the Rise. Parent-Teacher conferences; Weekly parent outreach sessions; Targeted guidance sessions; Skedula – Pupil path Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Teachers staff. 9/18-6/19 21 st Century, Good Shepherd Services Parents 9/18-6/19 Administrators, Differentiated guidance session related to high school articulation; Resources around community based support for families new to the country; Training for teachers around cultural sensitivity. Teachers, students Trust is built through the continual collaboration and inclusion of all stakeholders. We have an open-door policy for all staff and families that allows for reciprocal communication, problem-solving, and respect for everyone’s perspective. Overcoming obstacles; Leadership Development; group counseling and mediations support the trust that has already been established. The Development of a school culture team. Improving attendance On time arrival of all students Students, Parents, teachers Students, Parents, teachers Development of student peer groups to support student learning SUPER STAR Ticket Reward System as well as the ongoing professional learning mentioned will assist in our creation of a thriving school environment for all scholars including those who have high needs, students with disabilities, ENL scholars and scholars from all other sub-categories who need additional support. Students, Parents, teachers Teachers, Guidance counselors 9/18-6/19 Guidance Counselors, parent coordinator; Community Schools Director 9/18-6/19 Deans, 21 st Century, Good Shepherd Services, guidance counselors 9/18-6/19 Administrators, Deans, 21 st Century, Good Shepherd Services, guidance counselors 9/18-6/19 Administrators, Deans, 21 st Century, Good Shepherd Services, guidance counselors 9 The Development of 5 fundamental items all stakeholders in the building will uphold with fidelity. Establishing positive character rituals, routines, and practices that students and parents can articulate and identify with JHS 292. Implementing the use of restorative practices and restorative circles and advisories for targeted groups with the intention of the establishment of clear behavioral expectations for scholars and culminate into a vibrant school life. academic needs. Administrators, Teachers, Parents and Students 9/18-6/19 Administrators, Deans, 21 st Century, Good Shepherd Services, guidance counselors Conduct month to month surveys , hold student forums and focus groups to address areas that undermine respect, such as bullying, Respect For All concerns, and feeling safe in hallways and stairwells ● Incorporate student council in giving a student voice and agency to addressing respect and safety Administrators, Teachers, Parents and Students Design an After-school program geared to accelerate over- aged & under-credited students. Build their self-confidence and prepare them for the rigors of high school. This will be done through targeted intervention. Targeted group of students 9/18-6/19 Administrators, Deans, 21 st Century, Good Shepherd Services, guidance counselors. Teachers 9/18-6/19 Administrators, Deans, 21 st Century, Good Shepherd Services, guidance counselors. Teachers Tomorrows Leaders 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. In order to inform families on how to best support their children in a supportive environment JHS 292 will host a series of workshops geared to assist parents in understanding how we can foster greater collaboration between the home and school will take the following form at JHS 292: 1. Parent Workshops based on topics parents selected from a school generated Parent Survey 2. Working with the Leadership program to facilitate a series of workshops for parents around "How to talk to your child's Teacher." 3. Inviting parents to come and visit instruction in real time 4. Parent News letter developed by the Parent Coordinator 5. Celebrations to highlight the many diverse cultures in the 292 building. This action/presentation will be implemented with school administration; Parent Coordinator; PTA and SLT 0  Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. This action plan requires the leadership of the Principal, Assistant Principals, school safety agents, guidance counselors and teachers. All stakeholders will work together to provide a nurturing and safe environment all students and staff through ongoing collaboration, Safety meetings; Pupil Personnel Team meetings; Crisis Team meetings and Attendance meetings with parents. In addition to Monday Professional Gatherings, time will need to be made for team members to engage in analysis of school-wide point data, so additional per-session will be allocated, so that this activity can take place monthly on a given afternoon following the school day. Supervisor per-session will be allocated as well. 1. Weekly Attendance Meetings 2. Parent Workshops 3. Workshop facilitators 4. Deans Meeting 5. Related Services Meeting 6. SIT Team Meeting Because most of the training is offered for free by the city, we will need to budget money for substitute teachers to cover classes, so that they team may go out and receive the different professional learning opportunities that they will then return to school and turn-key. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E X X Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA Title II, Part A SIG X PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal.  By February 2019, OORS reports will show the school community is implementing other methods of addressing discipline other than suspensions.  By February 2019, daily scholar attendance will meet or exceed the city average.  By January 2019, parent attendance at school wide events will increase when compared to the 2015-2016 school year.  By February 2019 data collected from mid-year surveys offered to parents Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Daily Attendance Suspensions Based on OORS Reports Guidance Referrals Parent interaction based on PCAR data School Generated surveys Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 1  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. From the 2018-2019 School Environment Survey Across grades and content areas, curricula is aligned to Common Core Learning Standards and instructional shifts to give all students access to rigorous tasks that promote college and career readiness. Based on the 2018-2018 School Survey, 93% of teachers agreed that they their Professional Development experiences included an opportunity to work with colleagues in their school. Our strength is implementing strong practices of coherent curriculum, instruction with multiple entry points, and student centered, engaging instruction based on individualized data from common core aligned assessments. 1. Our need is also to better use data to create and implement specific, high quality scaffolds and extensions for all students to develop deeper understanding in all content areas. 2. a school-wide systems of tracking student progress during the instruction progress and making adjustments to students' needs in the lesson and lessons to follow. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 100% of JHS 292 teacher teams within and across all disciplines will engage in inter-visitations/lesson studies with a focus of improving best practices by observing and collaboratively planning to identify strategies that are most effective to address the needs of all students with priority focus on SWDs, ENLs, and high achieving students. As a result of sharing and implementing best practices, there will be a 10% increase in the overall passing rate of the lower third of our study body. 2  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Professional Development that focuses on Data Driven Instruction using teacher generated Diagnostics, classroom observations, content area and grade level teacher teams ESL pull-out and push-in models; I-Ready assessments and instruction; Math interventions Teachers 9/18-6/19 Administrators, Teachers, CITE Students 9/18-6/19 Teachers Parent-Teacher conferences; Weekly parent outreach sessions; Targeted guidance sessions; Skedula – Pupil path Parents 9/18-6/19 Overcoming obstacles; Leadership Development; group counseling and mediation. Trust is built through the continual collaboration and inclusion of all stakeholders.. We have an open-door policy for all staff and families that allows for reciprocal communication, problem-solving, and respect for everyone’s perspective 9/18-6/19 Students, Parents, teachers Parents, teachers, administrators Two guidance counselors support the Instructional Focus of JHS 292 through their work with students that are at risk, in crisis and for students that have mandated counseling we have been able to support and intervene where necessary. The guidance department does all of the mandated counseling, but goes above to reach new scholars and scholars who experience new circumstances at home. Their work supports the overall positive tone of the school. In addition we will utalize the services of Tomorrows Leaders and other CBO partners to build social and emotion growth to support students academic growth. General Education scholars with persistent disciplinary referrals, SWD, STH 9/18-6/19 Assistant Principal Professional Development, observations, coaching and collaborative planning will focus specifically on targeted Danielson components, as well as analyzing data for trends in targeted subgroups and making adjustments to curriculum and resources based on those trends, as well as implementing research based strategies to use appropriate and high quality scaffolds and extensions for targeted subgroups to support progress towards goals. Target support of subgroups in AIS groups and independent reading program. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement All Students 9/18-6/19 Teachers of all subjects, and all students, Teacher Leaders School Leaders Data Specialist 3  How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. In order to inform families on how to best how teachers collaborate JHS 292 will host a series of workshops geared to assist parents in understanding how we can foster greater collaboration between the home and school will take the following form at JHS 292: 1. Parent Workshops based on topics parents selected from a school generated Parent Survey 2. Working with the Leadership program to facilitate a series of workshops for parents around "How to talk to your child's Teacher." 3. Inviting parents to come and visit instruction in real time 4. Parent News letter developed by the Parent Coordinator 5. Celebrations to highlight the many diverse cultures in the 292 building. 6. Teachers calling home on Tuesday Afternoons with our 3, 2, 1 model. and logging those parental contacts This action/presentation will be implemented with school administration; Parent Coordinator; PTA and SLT This action/presentation will be implemented with school administration; Parent Coordinator; PTA, Good Shepard Services and SLT Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. This action plan requires the leadership of the Principal, Assistant Principals, school safety agents, guidance counselors and teachers. All stakeholders will work together to provide a nurturing and safe environment all students and staff through ongoing collaboration, Safety meetings; Pupil Personnel Team meetings; Crisis Team meetings and Attendance meetings with parents. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E X X Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA Title II, Part A SIG X PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 4  By January 2019, at least 80% of all students will show improved practice in identified priority CCLS (math and ELA) as measured by School-wide interim assessments. By February 2019, all educators will have engaged in at least 2 cycles of inter-visitation and working sessions to look at student work using a specific protocol. By March 2019, 60% of educators will have shown progress in Danielson elements 3C+ and 3D as evidenced by lesson plans, observation reports, improved discussion in classrooms and deepened rigor in lessons. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Advance Data Classroom observations Pre and Post Test Data from Bench Mark assessments Problem of the Day Assessment School Based Reflection sheets Inter-Visitation Reflections Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 5  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. For the 2018-2019 school year, JHS 292 will continue to work toward our vision by preparing for increased collaboration and interdisciplinary planning. While the professional development sessions are helpful and informative and have helped familiarize teachers with practices and ideas to move their students to higher performance levels, teachers will collaborate each week in sessions that are needs based/data driven, content specific, and differentiated. Based on the 2017-18 School environment survey 83% of teachers reported that they have a moderate to great deal of influence over school policy is an area of growth for JHS 292 will be around fostering an environment of distributive leadership. Our focus will be to build capacity among staff, enhances teacher development, and allows staff buy-in and ownership over the school building. To further strengthen the distributive leadership during the 2018-2019 academic year, teachers will rotate leading grade teams and vertical teams centered on the established instructional focus goals. Teachers will also have an integral part in planning and turn-keying professional development sessions that share best practices with colleagues while enhancing their leadership skills. Our focus will be to engage all stakeholders in in full ownership of the school’s goals to close the achievement gap. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 100% of the school leaders in collaboration with the Instructional Leadership Team will implement professional learning to support vertical and horizontal collaborative planning for the quality implementation of rigorous unit plans that provide targeted supports to address the needs of all students with an emphasis on ENL and SWD students. 6  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Principals and assistant principals will visit each teacher’s classroom at least 4 times over the course of the year, and provide teachers with formative written or verbal feedback aligned to the competencies of the individual teacher’s choice, in order to improve outcomes for all students. Teachers will engage in individual goal setting and progress monitoring meetings with Administrators focused on making one level of progress in performance on the competencies of the teachers’ choosing. Teachers will be provided with whole group or content area Professional Development on questioning and discussion techniques; assessment in instruction; student engagement and data driven instruction. Teachers will continue to meet in collaborative teacher teams and analyze student work to identify strengths and weaknesses in order to inform instruction Teachers will be provided with whole group or content area Professional Development on questioning and discussion techniques; assessment in instruction; student engagement and data driven instruction. Teachers will continue to meet in collaborative teacher teams and analyze student work to identify strengths and weaknesses in order to inform instruction. Special Education and ESL teachers will continue to meet during common prep periods and discuss best practices for their students based on current student work. Workshops that support parents understanding of, and participation in instructional initiatives and social/emotional growth such as Parent orientations; Skedula workshop; Managing conflict and behavior Flexible Professional Development plans with specific needs and assessments born out of Advance data, Learning Environment Survey, and June 2016 planning sessions with Consultants Collaborative Teacher Team Meetings, Looking at student work, Professional Development – Data Driven Instruction The Professional Learning Committee will meet to support planning and decision-making. We have an open-door policy for Teachers 9/18-6/19 7 Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? 9/18-6/19 All Teachers and All students Principal, Assistant Principals Instructional coaches Teachers 9/18-6/19 Administrators, Teachers Teachers 9/18-6/19 Administrators, Teachers Parents 9/18-6/19 Teachers 9/18-6/19 Parents, Administrators, Teachers Administrators, Teachers, Instructional coaches, External coaches Administrators, Teachers, Instructional coaches, External coaches all staff and families that allows for reciprocal communication, problem-solving, and respect for everyone’s perspective 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. In order to inform families on how to best communicate effective leadership at JHS 292, Both the Principal adn AP(s) will host a series of workshops/town hall meetings were we meet with the Parents and give them and opportunity for questions and answers. Additionally the School administration will go over the goals for the school year and articulate what progress has been made and what next steps need to be taken.: 1. Parent Workshops based on topics parents selected from a school generated Parent Survey 2. Inviting parents to come and visit instruction in real time 3. Parent News letter developed by the Parent Coordinator 4. Updating the school's website 5. Celebrations to highlight the many diverse cultures in the 292 builing. This action/presentation will be implemented with school administration; Parent Coordinator; PTA and SLT Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Teacher leaders and coaches, Teacher Incentive Fund staff (Peer Collaborative Teachers and Demonstration Teachers), Principal, Assistant Principals and all teachers will coordinate and present professional development activities, inter visitations, and collaborative planning sessions throughout the year. Professional Development will be provided periodically during Monday Teacher Team time, as well as during non attendance days (September Preparation days, Election Day, Chancellor’s Day) and a Saturday retreat in January using Focus School Set-Aside funds. All teachers and administrators will participate in the professional development, instructional rounds, and inter visitation activities. All teachers will participate in the observation cycle, which will be facilitated by the Principal and Assistant Principals. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA X Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant 8  C4E X 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG X PTA Funded In Kind X Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019 60% of teachers will have improved one level in Advance on the component of their choosing in Advance Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Advance Data Individual Teacher Conferences Student Work Products Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 9  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. JHS 292 creates a welcoming environment for families and the community as a whole by engaging in various activities. For instance, during our parent orientation, we not only inform parents of our rigorous curriculum; we also engage them in several performances from the performing arts department. Our literacy fair, which displays student work across the content areas, is open to the community. Additionally, our PTA and parent coordinator, work together to provide various workshops for our parents and the community. Additional workshops on the Common Core Learning Standards, and providing students with additional assistance at home, would be beneficial to the parents also. Based on the 2018-19 School Environment survey has shown evidence that we need to do more to engage parents. In comparison to the 2018-19 academic year 292 dropped in this area. Although parents take part in school wide celebrations (e.g., Christmas Concert, Ambi Sisters, Dinner Father Son Breakfast, End of Year Concert). For the upcoming academic year, as a school we are going to work on developing systems to offer parents a personalized invitation to part in Parental workshops. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, JHS 292 will send out monthly communication to parents informing them of the curriculum and expectations for each subject area. We will also collaborate with Community Schools to conduct three information sessions focused on CCLS, middle to high school articulation and school safety. As a result, there will be an increase in parental involvement which will be evidenced by a 5-10% increase of parent satisfaction on the school culture section of the learning environment survey and the PCAR. 0  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Parent workshops that support parents’ understanding of, and participation in, instructional initiatives and social/emotional growth such as Parent orientations; Skedula workshop; Managing conflict and behavior. 9/18-6/19 Teachers, students and administrators In addition we will offer our ENL parents an opportunity to take English language classes. Our performing arts program allows parents to see their children, including students with disabilities and English language learners gain confidence and develop self-esteem through the arts. Our Literacy fair and the Curriculum fair will increase parent involvement in their children’s education, and they are open to the community as well. These activities will offer parents insight into JHS 292's instructional focus The JHS 292 High School Fair is designed to increase parents awareness of what is available to their children as it relates to high school enrollment. 9/18-6/19 9/18-6/19 Parents, students, members of the community Parents, students, members of the community Administrators, teachers, parent coordinator, Guidance counselors, 21 st Century, PTA. Administrators, teachers, parent coordinator, Guidance counselors, 21 st Century, PTA. Administrators, teachers, parent coordinator, Guidance counselors, 21 st Century, PTA. Trust is built through the continual collaboration and inclusion of all stakeholders. We have implemented a professional learning committee and include key staff in our leadership planning meetings. We have an open-door policy for all staff and families that allows for reciprocal communication, problem-solving, and respect for everyone’s perspective. Parents, students, members of the community 9/18-6/19 Administrators, teachers, parent coordinator, Guidance counselors, 21 st Century, PTA. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. 1  Good Shepard Services Tomorrows Leaders C.A. R..E Inc. 21th Century Grant The Leadership Program Creative Connections Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. This action plan requires the leadership of the principal, assistant principals, parent coordinator, PTA and CBO who will work together to plan and implement robust parent involvement opportunities. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E X X Title I SWP X Title I TA Title II, Part A 21st Century Grant SIG X PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Parent Coordinator will continue to be the liaison between school and families School messenger and Skedula, to provide automated phone calls and mailings to families based on student attendance, upcoming events, student performance and progress, and school activities. Teachers will use their Tuesday Afternoons for parent outreach by cohort, (Family Meeting Times), tracking communication with parents using a common school wide log and through the online grading system, Skedula. Supervisor of parent engagement will coordinate teacher roles and preparation for Tuesday afternoon Family Meeting Times, Family night, parent workshops, Parent Teacher Conferences, Parent Workshops, and parent involvement events designed to increase parent engagement and communication. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Data will be tracked through: parent sign in sheets Teacher Phone Logs 2  PCAR data Parent Coordinator sign in sheets Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 3  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Mathematics Science Social Studies At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) MOSL Performance Assessments; NYS ELA Exam, classroom observations, I-Ready MOSL Performance Assessments; NYS ELA Exam, classroom observations, I-Ready; IXL; NYS Regents Exam MOSL Performance Assessments; NYS ELA Exam, classroom observations, I-Ready MOSL Performance Assessments; NYS ELA Exam, classroom observations, I-Ready; NYS Regents Exam Group/individual counseling and intervention services or, as per IEP Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Saturday Academy, Extended Day Program, activities aligned with the Common core Learning Standards Saturday Academy, Extended Day Program, activities aligned with the Common core Learning Standards Saturday Academy, Extended Day Program, activities aligned with the Common core Learning Standards Saturday Academy, Extended Day Program, activities aligned with the Common core Learning Standards During the school day, before/ after school Small group instruction, tutoring, working in pairs Saturday Academy, Extended Day, during the school day Small group instruction, tutoring, working in pairs Saturday Academy, Extended Day, during the school day Small group instruction, tutoring, working in pairs Saturday Academy, Extended Day, during the school day Small group instruction, tutoring, working in pairs Saturday Academy, Extended Day, during the school day Group/individual During the school day, before/ after school 4  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 119 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. We provide our STH population with the following supports: Access to school counselor support for at-risk counseling and adaptive support. Access to partner services such as the Mobile Crises Unit, to ensure students have access to services. Access to school supplies, including uniforms, backpacks, books, pens, pencils, paper, binders. Transportation support for families. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 5  N/A 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. N/A 6  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. All staff participates in teacher team meetings in their content area and across the grades. These meetings focus on analyzing student work to inform instruction based on their needs. Teachers conduct professional development sessions, which include Professional Development outside of the school which they turn- key to their colleagues. Every year staff work together to create interdisciplinary units and modify curriculum to meet the needs of all students Our strategies for assignments will be for teachers to be given an opportunity to pursue their own vision for the school through leadership in department planning and professional development, extra-curricular activities, electives and programs that draw on their talents. While teachers will be assigned to programs that align to their certification and expertise, they will also be given the opportunity to define their role in the learning community through this shared ownership. Our strategies for support are that teachers will receive mentoring from experienced veterans, and participate in a new teacher cohort to become oriented with the school’s culture and expectations, as well as receive support in practical areas such as classroom management, planning, and school procedures. Teachers will receive targeted professional development opportunities from coaches, administrators, mentors, exemplar teachers, peers and professional development vendors to support their individually expressed needs through surveys and individual professional development plans. Teachers will be provided access to title 1 funds under title 1 regulations to attain certification to become highly qualified in their assignment area. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). Teachers engage in professional development that focus on the Danielson Framework for teaching, and speak to the needs of the teachers. CEIPEA and 21 st Century offer professional development for all staff on a regular basis. Recruitment: To recruit teachers, we work closely with our Network’s human resources, traditional teacher education programs, and alternative licensure programs. We have attended hiring fairs to identify and recruit highly-qualified teachers. We 7  continue to work closely with our Human Resources to ensure that all required documentation and assessment deadlines are met. Retention and Support: In our efforts to retain highly qualified teachers and ensure they have the supports and strategies to grow professionally, we are highly invested in professional development. We offer professional development to teachers provided by other teachers, administrators, as well as support staff from our PSO, CEI-PEA. Mentoring is implemented as per teacher requirements. Non-tenured teachers are given opportunities to learn about the tenure process and our network provides support in this area. Teachers are provided with PL in instruction, classroom management, parental involvement, and all areas of data use. We believe in individualized professional development plans that are designed to focus on each teacher’s needs. Teachers are active participants in the process and collaborate with administrators to review their goals and monitor progress and development. Each teacher will develop an Individual Improvement Plan (IIP) mainly to move teachers toward highly-effective practice. The Danielson’s Framework for Teacher Effectiveness (2007) will is used to track areas of need and progress. Teachers self-assess on a regular basis and confer with school leaders. All professional development is research and evidence based. Research Based Strategies (RBIs) are emphasized in our trainings. Inter-visitations are encouraged for all teachers as well as participation in external professional development opportunities. Our network specialists support teacher retention by providing on-site job-embedded trainings, modeling, and teacher team development. We are committed to developing a culture for learning and celebrating the success of our teachers. To this end, we encourage team events, opportunities for external learning, and highlighting exemplary work. 1. Teachers, Principals, Assistant Principals, Para Professionals and staff are supported through professional development that enable all students to meet CCSS by a variety of means: 2. Targeted PD plans for every teacher developed collaboratively with a supervisor during an initial planning conference 3. District PD 4. Consultant Support on CCSS (Generation Ready, Urban Institute for Minority Education) 5. Teachers Incentive Fund support 6. PD provided by central offices/ District office 7. 8. Collaborative study and reflection Internal PD provided by peers, coaches, teacher leaders and administration Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A Part 4: SWP Schools Only 8  4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). NA 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. On a weekly basis, teachers meet to analyze student work and agree on formative and summative assessments for students on their grade level. Additionally, teachers work with administrators to identify diagnostic tests and progress monitoring tools to continually assess student learning. The school has a functioning MOSL Committee. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Column B Verify with an (X) Section Reference(s) Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 633,510.00 0 11,200.00 0 3,875,320.00 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. 9  Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 0  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. J.H.S. 292 Margaret S. Douglas, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students Margaret S. Douglas MIddel School (JHS 292) will support parents and families of Title I students by: ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; The school’s Parent Involvement Parental Involvement and School Quality 1  The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability grade-level curriculum and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, Progress Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Every Student Succeeds Act; ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings, with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; 2  ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between /teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) School-Parent Compact (SPC) Template J.H.S. 292 Margaret S. Douglas , in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; 3  ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; Provide general support to parents by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering will all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; 4  ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 5  Addendum: Community School Partnerships Directions: The Community School (CS) strategy is directly aligned to the Framework for Great Schools. Community Schools bring schools and community partners together and integrate academics, health, youth development, and family engagement to provide students with the tools and opportunities they need to succeed. The Core Services in Community Schools are Expanded Learning Time (ELT), Attendance Supports, Family Engagement, and Health & Wellness. Part 1 – Community School Partnerships Goal(s) How is the CS strategy integrated into academic instruction at your school, and what impact has it had on student academic outcomes? How is the CS strategy integrated into academic instruction at your school, and what impact has it had on student academic outcomes? The Community Schools Model is integrated into the Margaret S. Douglas academic program through using community school funds to promote literacy across all content areas. This is achieved by providing additional classroom resources and books for students. Through Community Schools we place additional emphasis on student attendance. When students are present for school they are able to take advantage of all opportunities to reach their academic potential. This is achieved by incentive programs to reward students for outstanding attendance and academic achievement. Additionally, community school funds are also used to support families in need with basic supplies (e.g., coasts and uniforms) to take obstacles out of the way that may hinder students from attending school. The Community Schools Model also allows for extended learning time to assist students with basic skills in Math and ELA. Indicate the summative goal(s) of the Community School for the 2018-19 school year. Be sure to construct the goal to be SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Realistic, and Time-bound. By June 2019, through our community schools partnership JHS 292 will see a 5% increase in students daily attendance. This will be measured through ATS reports, weekly attendance meetings and the New Visions attendance tracker. Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Community School Annual Goal(s): How will achieving your Community School Goal(s)--in Expanded Learning Time (ELT), Attendance Supports, Family Engagement, and Health & Wellness--support your academic goals for students? All goals outlined in the Community Schools partnership will support all of the 292 instructional goals by offering additional opportunities to work with students in small groups. The additional resources will allow targeted interventions for identified subgroups. In conjunction with academic supports, the school will also be able to address or assist the family in addressing any social, emotional or health issues that may be preventing a students from meeting their full academic potential. Part 2 – Community School Partnerships Core Services Action Plan Part 2a. Identify the Community-based Organization (CBO) partnerships that you will develop in ELT, Attendance Supports, Family Engagement, and Health & Wellness, their target student population(s), and scope of the services provided. As well as supporting schools’ supportive environment and attendance work, CBOs should be helping to support your school’s instructional focus. CBO Partnership Target Population Scope of Service SY18-19 SMART Goal 6  Good Shepherd Services All Students Attendance Outreach Good Shepherd Services Students with OORS or behavioral infractions Community Circles Good Shepherd Services All Families/ All Students Family Engagement By June 2019, through our community schools partnership JHS 292 will see a 5% increase in students daily attendance. This will be measured through ATS reports, weekly attendance meetings and the New Visions attendance tracker. BY June 2019, the JHS 292 school community will have issued less than 10 superintendents suspensions for the academic year. This will be tracked through OORs data. By June 2019, JHS 292 will collaborate with community schools to conduct three information sessions focused on CCLS, middle to high school articulation and school safety. As a result, there will be an increase in parental involvement which will be evidenced by a 5-10% increase of parent satisfaction on the school culture section of the learning environment survey and the PCAR. Part 3 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 3a. Indicate resources your Community Partnership will leverage to achieve your summative SMART goal(s) and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. The Community Schools Partnership will achieve our SMART goals through staffing the following positions: Community Schools Director Restorative Justice Coordinator Advocate Counselor Attendance Outreach coordinator 7  Part 3b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) X X Title I SWP Title III Title I TA X PTA Funded P/F Set-aside X 21st Century C4E SIG Grant School Achievement X Other Funding Part 3c. Describe how the school will partner with the Lead CBO to do the following: 1. Community Schools are expected to partner with a community-based partner organization (CBO) and together with members of the School Leadership Team, hire a Community School Director. The Director will lead implementation of the asset and needs assessment process, and other critically important coordinating activities. Indicate how you will leverage this aspect of the work. Community Schools are expected to personalize the needs of all students, through strategic programming and services, as determined by the asset and needs assessment, and must also offer Expanded Learning Time (ELT) and mental health programming. In completing this section, ensure that you think about how: (1) the right services are provided to the right students and families at the right time; and (2) how you will seamlessly coordinate services with instructional programming happening throughout and outside of the school day. Indicate how you will implement this work, and describe other programming you anticipate to be in place to strengthen this initiative. Community Schools are expected to emerge as Partnership Schools, which are places where parents and families feel welcome, actively participate in the conversation and decision-making around the renewal of their schools, and have many opportunities to advocate for their children. Monthly meetings and Community School Forums engaging families and community stakeholders will be a critical part of this family engagement strategy. Describe how you will implement this aspect of the work. Community School Principals are expected to meet on a weekly basis with their Community School Director, select Assistant Principals, key staff, and other CBOs, to analyze trends in data and case manage individual students. Data tools – including the New Visions Data Sorter - and training will be available for schools to use. Indicate how you will implement this aspect of the work. 2. 3. 4. The Community Schools Director will be utilized to coordinate all of the CBO in the 292 building to work to one identified goal to move students toward success. Through ongoing team meetings students and their specific needs will be identified in team meetings (e.g., attendance, SITT, Deans and Teacher Teams) students will be identified and refereed to guidance counselor(s) or RJ director where specific interventions can be designed and implemented to assist the identified students. These services will take into account academic services and are designed to support student's academic achievement. providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community. 8  The Principal, Assistant Principal and Community Schools Director meet daily for a morning check and have an ongoing weekly meeting to discuss what is taking place in the school. The New Visions data tracker will be utilized in our weekly attendance meetings to review students attendance patterns. Part 4 – Community School Partnerships Oversight Part 4a. Key Staff and Partners 1. Name and describe the scope of involvement of all community partners working in the school (include partners supporting ELT, counseling, enrichment, etc.) 2. Name the members of your Community School Team and how meetings will be organized and structured to engage all stakeholders and be focused on results. 3. Explain data strategies including the use of the data sorter, and steps that the school will take to ensure that the appropriate interventions are provided to the right students The partnership between Margaret s. Douglas [JHS 292] and Good Shepherd Services are working to create seamless supports that enable children and youth to learn and succeed and help families and communities to thrive. These partnerships bring together diverse individuals and groups, including principals, teachers, school superintendents, school boards, community-based organizations, youth development organizations, health and human service agencies, parents and other community leaders, to expand opportunities for children, families, and communities. The partnership engage in a thoughtful process to define a vision and clear goals. Partnerships will have effective governance and management structures to ensure that programs operate efficiently and the partnership is responsive to community needs. Community school partnerships also need to draw from a broad range of perspectives and expertise—from inside the school as well as from other organizations and individuals within the community. Finally, community school partnerships need to connect, coordinate, and leverage resources from a variety of sources to support and continue their work. The Community schools meeting will be an extension of the school-wide cabinet meeting. Key stakeholders will be: Principal. Ahmed Edwards, Assistant Principal Tishica Mitchell, Community Schools Director Jose Riveria, Ms. Eriena Good Shepherd after school program director, Ms. Isabel Santos and Sherry Valez, parents to discuss how best to utilize the resources provided by the community schools program. Through on going meetings from 7/2018 to 6/19 members of the JHS 292 community team will meet to discuss trends and review data. Based on those meetings a targeted action plan will be designed for specific students or groups of students. Part 4b. Indicate resources needed including human resources, instructional resources, and schedule adjustments to implement the Community School program. We will need to ensure that the CBO liaison meets regularly with the grade level attendance team in order to ensure all students are provided with the necessary supports. In addition, the SLCs must monitor attendance on a weekly basis to quickly respond to absences. This will require an additional attendance coordinator on the GSS team. Part 4c. Timeline for implementation and completion, including start and end dates. The timeline will be on going from 7/18 to 6/19. Part 4d. Mental Health Work Plan Separate from this S/CEP, schools will complete a Mental Health Work Plan that will become an addendum to this document. 9  0  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 1  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information 2 1 1 Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: This Instructional Program will address the needs of all English Language Learners that are currently in grades 6, 7 & 8. The program will include small group instruction with a teacher to student ratio of 1:20. Students are given permission slips in English and their native language, which their parents complete and return. The After-School program will begin in November and end in March. It will be held twice a week from 2:50PM to 4:20PM and will run for a total of 21weeks. The program will consist of two teachers, one certified ESL teacher (E. Yusupov), and one content area teacher (F.Moore). Classes will take place after school on Wednesdays and Thursdays. This information is based on review of state test scores and teacher team meeting that review students' work. During these sessions students will be instructed in English. Throughout each session students will be working on different reading and writing strategies to become commanding in the English language. Additionally, activities will be geared towards language development to assist students in making progress towards reaching English language proficiency on the NYSESLAT as well as, meeting the NY State assessments for graduation. Instruction will be differentiated to meet the needs of ELL students that are at the entering, emerging, transitioning and expanding proficiency levels. According to the data collected on the RLAT we noticed that there are many students at the Entering and Emerging levels due to this fact we decided to target these students. A diagnostic test is administered to determine the students' strengths and weaknesses and they will be exposed to skill-based instruction in reading and writing based on their weaknesses. As per results on the NYSESLAT it seems as though our English Language Learners tend to struggle in the reading and writing subtests. Due to this fact, we will create activities for our ELLs that are geared towards reading and writing to gain proficiency on the NYSESLAT. This year our ELLs will have access to the MYON reading program, which, is an on-line resource. However, the primary materials that will be used throughout the program are Finish Line New York ELLs: Bilingual Common Core (for 2016 NYSESLAT) and Vocabulary Links for English Language Development. Students will be engaged in programs to assist in their fluency in English. This will be accomplished through trips and programs to practice their English Language skills. Based on NYS exam analysis and NYSESLAT results, we have determined a need to offer extra support to our students especially in the area of literacy and math in the core subjects. The students to be served in this program range from 6th, 7th and 8th grade ESL students who are struggling to meet the state standards as they relate to promotion and college-readiness. During 45 minute blocks students will be serviced by an ESL teacher around additional writing/literacy classes with emphasis on writing techniques as students prepare to become high school and college ready. 2  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information ESL methodologies with scaffolding activities will be used to ensure mastery of concepts. Materials used in this program will include audio-visuals, publications, and appropriate reading level books for differentiated instruction, activities, and assignments. Students participating in Saturday School will offer additional classroom instruction in ELA and Math. This instruction will be target to assist students with developing their vocabulary skills and numeracy. With regards to PM school S. Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: Professional Development is provided for all ESL service providers and content area teachers. Topics include current research and materials, best practices, ELL data review and ESL/ELA standards, core curriculum and ESL prototype to support a balanced literacy approach. Teacher team meetings address teaching strategies and student specific questions and concerns. Professional Development meetings take place monthly while school based teacher team meetings are arranged once per week and is based on data driven instruction. Built-in, weekly, grade-specific professional development as well as weekly cabinet meetings, offer ample opportunity to share and discuss best practices and next steps. Teachers will assess ELL student progress in all content areas during professional development periods. Ninety minutes of Professional Development per week is built into the ESL teacher's schedule. Our licensed ESL teacher (E.Yusupov) will be providing at least three (90 minute) workshop sessions to all content area teachers that work with ELLs on a daily basis. Professional Development topics include, but are not limited to: - Differentiating Instruction to Meet the Needs of ELLs - Analyzing Student Work - Using Data to Inform Instruction - Incorporating and Developing Vocabulary Strategies into Writing - Supporting ELLs in the General Education Classroom We anticipate that each month one-workshop session will be given to the content area teachers by the licensed ESL teacher. Professional Development is on going and will continue based on the needs of teachers and students as we continue our formative assessments and our formal and informal observations. Qualified PD providers CITE NYC DOE Teachers will have on going Professional Development Through the Professional offering for ENL students provided by Brooklyn North PD offerings. This PD will impact students by seeing an increase in fluency and reading comprehension, 3  Part C: Professional Development Records will be maintained on Google Drive and hard copies maintained in the guidance office in students files. Rationale: To develop Common Core units of study for different English Language proficiency levels, PD will be provided as follows: Lorilet Monegro, professor of Education at LIU, will provide seven (7) sessions of professional development on Common Core and utalizing new speech and language techniques. These sessions will tentatively be held as follows: 2/2017 - Understanding Common Core Shifts in Mathematics 2/2017 - Developing Strategies and Activities to Engage Students 3/9/2015 - Developing Questioning Techniques to Guide Students to a Deeper Understanding 3/23/2017 - Giving Appropriate and Effective Feedback to Ensure Mastery 4/13/2017 - Developing Activities that Engage Students in Communicating Concepts and Processes in Writing 4/20/2017 - Developing In-Class Activites to Asses Students for Understanding and How to Use This Information to Adjust Instruction 5/11/2017 - Developing Activities in Which Students Apply Mathematical Concepts to SOlve Real Life Problems. Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: It is imperative that parents of ELLs are thoughtfully involved in the education of their children. In order to enable parents to provide academic support to their children, they are afforded the opportunity to participate in GED classes, Open School night, PTA meetings, and Performing Arts activates which are open to all students and parents. The school partners with the YWCA, PTA and the CAPP program who offers workshops once a month for topics such as, Resume Writing, Signs of Bullying, and Healthy Food Choices, etc. Our school staff and the Translation and Interpretation Unit provide translation services for our Non- English speaking parents. Additionally, IS 292 hosts a Parent Leadership Workshops once a month, for about two hours long, from 6:00 pm to 8:00 pm, that consist of: Family Fun Night!, Choices Fit for Life, Acceptance and Responsibility, Embracing Differences, Holiday Celebration, Arts & Crafts, etc. Attending these workshops is our licensed ESL teacher, Parent coordinator, and a certified teacher that assist with translation/interpretation for our ELL parents. Records will be maintained in the parent coordinator's office Parent Workshops will take place at least once per month 1. Intro to 292 School Staff 2. Supports for ENl families Good Shepard Services 3. The High school process 292 staff 4. Career Readiness 292 Staff 6. Holidays around the world 292 Staff 7. Preparing for the Test/ computer literacy Good Shepard Services 8. looking forward to next academic year CARE 4 Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Translation services will be provided by 292 staff. For languages outside of our scope we will employ the DOE translation services.. LEtters will be back packed home to parents in their home language. Additionally a phone message will be sent home in students' home languages. Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits) $0  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL 0 0 0 0 12,366 Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. 0 0 0 5  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 19 School Name Margaret S. Douglas Borough Brooklyn School Number 292 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Evelyn Maxfield Coach K. Larco ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher E. Yusupov Teacher/Subject Area F. Moore/ELA Teacher/Subject Area Y. Alleyne/ELA Related-Service Provider R. Williamston/Guidance Counse Superintendent Joyce Stallings-Harte Assistant Principal Olga Stweart-Nelson Coach T. Mitchell School Counselor F. Obimbah Parent S. Joseph Parent Coordinator J. Jenkins Field Support Center Staff Member Yazmin Torres Other (Name and Title) type here C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 0 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 1 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics 6  Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 630 Total number of ELLs 64 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 10.16% Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 0 1 4 3 2 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 5 0 6 NA NA NA NA NA NA 0 7 NA NA NA NA NA NA 0 8 9 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? 1. We utilize the results of the NYSITELL and the NYSESLAT, the NYC performance tests and the NYS tests in English Language Arts and Math, teacher made unit tests and quizzes to make informed decisions about the skills of our students. The data helps us create multiple entry points for our entering, emerging, transitioning, expanding, and commanding ELLs. Much more than tell us the literacy skills that our ELLs are deficient in, the data helps us to group our students and provide skill-specific instruction for them. Data also provides us with insights on how to create multipe entry points fpr our ELLs. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? 7  School Counselors CBOs 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? 8. The success of our programs for ELLs is measured by the comparison of diagnostic testing data against formative and summative testing. Additionally, projects, portfolio pieces and teacher made assessments are used to evaluate the success of our ELL program. : 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? Through our program we seek to service the entire ENL population of JHS 292 (approximately 90 students). The Margaret S. Douglas Middle School Extended day program will consist of the following experiences for ELL students’ which will center around literacy skills through individualized learning plans, small group instruction, vocabulary games, journaling, and more. Our students’ success comes from their dedication to individualized instruction and tutoring, the relationships between students and staff, and the work that JHS 292 puts into building strong relationships with the communities and schools they serve. The JHS 292 Middle school program will reinforce much of the skills learned in class and their extended day program. The Saturday program will work with a selected group of students to work on their written expression and test sophistication. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] JHS 292 utilizes data from the NYS ELA and Math Exams; iReady and classroom formative and summative assessments to identify the strenghths and weaknesses of our ELL students. After collaboration and data analysis, teachers implements strategies such as small group or one to one instruction; and flexible grouping to meet the needs of all ESL students in the class. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. 2. While more students display proficiency in listening and speaking, reading and writing continues to pose a challenge. The NYSESLAT modalities will affect the way we taylor instruction for ELLs. Four ELA teachers, along with the ESL teacher, will work collaboratively to analyze the data. Based on our data trends, we will focus much more heavily on the reading and writing modalities, as these continue to be the areas of struggle for ELLs. The NYSITELL scores provide the ESL teacher insights on how much the newcome already knows. The scores of the NYSITELL are also broken down into five modalities entering, emerging, transitioning, expanding, and commanding. These performace levels are alligned to the NYSESLAT, which can be beneficially to the teachers when collecting data. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? Student surveys Student work products Classroom observations Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students 8  regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. Instruction is delivered in stand alone and integrated model. ELLs travels together as a group by grade. They are a heterogeneous group with mixed proficiency levels. b. TBE program. If applicable. N/A c. DL program. If applicable. N/A 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? As per CR Part 154, the ESL teacher, E. Yusupov, practices the push-in and pull-out model for her students to ensure that all students receive their mandated number of instructional minutes in Frestanding English as a New Language. (360 mins. – Entering & Emerging studnets; 180 mins – Transitioning and Expanding studnets; 90 mins.- Commanding students) 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. All ESL students receive instruction using common core aligned curriculum in all content areas. ESL teacher uses the stand alone model and the intergrated model to ensure that the students are utilising language development skills within the classroom. Additionally, students are provided core curricular materials in alternate languages. Furthermore, instruction is differentiated based on collaboration between content area teachers and ESL teacher. JHS 292 does not have TBE/DL programs as of yet. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? Spanish speaking ELLs who score below proficiency level on the NYSITELL are furthur evaluated in their native language using the Spanish LAB-R. Additionally, throughout the year the ESL teacher provides the studnets with testing accomidations, (such as: testing in their native language) in certain content areas to ensure that the ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their native languages. Spanish Lab R 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status a. Nuturing and mentoring are incorporated into the SIFE academic program. Being aware of the many socio-economic and academic issues that impact the ELLs, the staff provide additional support and help through tutorials and Saturday Academy. b. With the aid of the fully liscened ESL teacher and the content areas teachers, needs analyses will be conducted so that there is a point of reference at which to begin instruction. Instruction will then be differentiated to meet the needs of the newcomers. Students will be continuously assessed so that instruction is tailored to meet their needs. As students are prepared for the modalities of the NYSESLAT, they will also be exposed to the demands of the New York State English Language Arts assessment. c. Developing ELLs will receive additional language acquisition instruction by implementing after school programs and Saturday Academy. Students are provided small group instruction and opportunities to attend extended day programs. d. Long Term-ELLs receive additional language acquisition instruction, computer training, and Job corp registration assistance. e. Former ELL studnets up to two years are provided with additional support through Saturday Academy, testing 9  accomidations, and the opportunity to attend extended day programs. Additionally, they are also prvided with 90 minutes of integrated ENL within their ELA or other content area class. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? ELL-SWDs in our school receive both related services and self-contained instruction. ESL students utililze "Inside" by National Geographic Learning which is Common Core aligned . All students receive instruction in all classes that is also common core aligned. Students receiving related services are given support through SETSS so that they can be successful in regular education classes. Service providers, including the ESL and SETSS teacher, and the guidance counselor, who work with the classroom teachers to maximize the support they can receive in their regular classroom by pushing in wherever possible. ELLs In self-contained SE classes are pulled out for ESL Services with ELLs with the ESL teacher and other ELL students, to meet their needs in the least restrictive environment possible. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? ELL-SWD will receive additional language acquistion instruction by implementing "My On" reading program, Brain Pop, and Brain Pop ESL, After School programs and Saturday Academy. The School Implementation Team ensures that students with disabilities receive flexible programing and is placed in the least restrictive environment for certain subject areas. Additionally, the use of technology, ipads, laptops and the smartboard, allows a certified liscened pedagog to differentiate instruction to meet their needs. We ensure that all ELL-SWD have flexible programing and smaller groups to enable them to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficieny within the least restrictive enviornment 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. ELLs receive intervention in ELA, Math, social Studies and Science through small group instruction, and one-on-one instruction when necessary. The ESL teacher provides servies using the push in/pull out model. During that time she is able to conference with students and provide instruction based on their individual needs. "MyOn" reader, a literacy based program, is used to supplement language acquisition and development in ELA, while the students are exposed to the Orchard intervention program in math. Our entering, emerging, and transitioning ELLs benefit extremely from the these programs. We also provide Saturday Academy and the two 90 minute sessions a week, where ELLs are targeted in small groups. Additionally, there are Spanish editions of text books in the content areas to help supplement the students' language acquisition. Through our program we seek to service the entire ENL population of JHS 292 (approximately 90 students). The Margaret S. Douglas Middle School Extended day program will consist of the following experiences for ELL students’ which will center around literacy skills through individualized learning plans, small group instruction, vocabulary games, journaling, and more. Our students’ success comes from their dedication to individualized instruction and tutoring, the relationships between students and staff, and the work that JHS 292 puts into building strong relationships with the communities and schools they serve. The JHS 292 Middle school program will reinforce much of the skills learned in class and their extended day program. The Saturday program will work with a selected group of students to work on their written expression and test sophistication. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? The new program that is being used this school year is called “MyON” reader. It is a complete literacy solution that reinvents student reading. “MyOn” is a literacy program that creates an individual profile for students based on their interests and reading ability and generates a recommended book list that students can use when determining what they want to read. each student is given their own username and password. The teacher is then able to follow their progress and identify the different reading levels. Additionally, teachers are incorperating the use of BrainPOP in their lessons to creat more of a visual learning setting for the ELLs. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? N/A 0  11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. Our ELL population has equal access to all programs during and after school. (ex.. martial arts, marching band, african drumming, basketball, music……) ELLs participate in a performing arts elective for 90 minutes each week. Additional, tutoring is provided to advanced ELLs and transitional students to ensure they maintain a successful grade on the NYS ELA and Math exams. Futhermore, we have two large after school prgrams Good Shepard and CAPP where the ELLs are welcomed. Additionally, all ELLs are serviced during After School with ESL teacher twice a week and Saturday Academy. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. ESL classes are mainly instructed in English, with support available in their Native Language where possible and appropriate. The use of the Native Language is encouraged among students where it enhances learning, especially in cooperative groups where at least one member is a Newcomer or Beginner. The native language is accepted as an oral or written response, although the teacher responds in English and rephrases the response in English. Books in the students native languages are available in the classroom libraries. Additionally, ELLs are exposed to MyOn, bilingual glossaries, bilingual dictionaries, ipads, laptops, smart board, classroom libraries, and multi-lingual resources in the library. Our ELL population is exposed to the same rigorous academic standards as mainstream. All elements of balanced literacy instruction are provided to ELLs. Content area teachers provide a consistent program of instruction by following timelines with a systematic approach to learning that incorporates spiraling and scaffolding learning activates in small group or centered instruction. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? 15. Native Language support is delivered by the use of technology: laptops, ipads. Additionally classroom libraries which feature texts both in English and the native language: bilingual dictionaries, and glossaries. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. The required services support the ELLs by keeping up with the adolescences interests ; the use of technology is also used to support the ELLs in the class. Students are provided with age appropriate and grade level materials to further support their needs. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? ESL classes are mainly instructed in English, with support available in their Native Language where possible and appropriate. The use of the Native Language is encouraged among students where it enhances learning, especially in cooperative groups where at least one member is a Newcomer or Beginner. The native language is accepted as an oral or written response, although the teacher responds in English and rephrases the response in English. Books in the students native languages are available in the classroom libraries. Additionally, ELLs are exposed to MyOn, bilingual glossaries, bilingual dictionaries, ipads, laptops, smart board, classroom libraries, and multi-lingual resources in the library. Our ELL population is exposed to the same rigorous academic standards as mainstream. All elements of balanced literacy instruction are provided to ELLs. Content area teachers provide a consistent program of instruction by following timelines with a systematic approach to learning that incorporates spiraling and scaffolding learning activates in small group or centered instruction. Our school shares a building with 2 other charter schools. The DOE resources are not shared. 1  16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). Classroom libraries that are in the students native languages, are purchased at the middle school level. They are used to help newly enrolled ELL students adjust to the changes. Additionally, new ELLs who are enrolled within the school year are buddied up with another native speaking student to assist him/her with the adjustment. The new ELLs are also exposed to many activities that incorperate their native language, so that they are able to have an easier adjustment and don’t struggle with culture shock. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? At this moment, we are not offering language electives. However, in the future we would like to offer foeign language to students. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? N/A Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? 1. Professional development is provided for all ESL service providers and content area teachers. Topics include current research and materials, best practices, ELL data review and ESL/ ELA standards, core curriculum, and the ESL prototype to support a balanced literacy approach. Teacher team meetings address teaching strategies and student specific questions and concerns. Professional development meetings take place monthly while school-based meetings are arranged more frequently depending on the progress of the students as evidenced by student periodic assessments. Teachers and staff members of ELLs are: Ms. Moore (ELA), Ms. Alleyene (ELA), Ms. Wolfe (ELA), Mr. Jones (ELA & Hummanities), Ms. Clifton (Math), Ms. Jimenez (Math), Ms. Slade (Math), Mr. Nipper (Math), Ms. Hamilton (Social studies), Ms. Baldwin (Social Studies), Mr. Lewis (science), Ms. Baidan ( science), Ms. Collins (science), Ms. Yusupov (ENL Teacher), S.Harris (para professional) Ms. Cohen (Speech), Mr. Williamstin & Ms. Obimba ( guidance counselors). Our ESL teacher attends workshops provided by the Department of Education and other external sources. In teacher teams, she turn-keys this information to other teachers of ELLs. Professional Development sessions and Teacher Team meetings provide teachers with the opportunity to analyze data and determine next steps for their students; analyze student work to determine strengths and weaknesses and collaborate with their colleagues on the Danielson Framework for teaching to implement best practices for student engagement and achievement. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. Built-in weekly, grade specific professional development as well as weekly cabinet meetings, offer ample opportunity to share and discuss best practices and next steps. In addition, we are able to assess ELL student progress in other content areas with those theachers during professional development periods. Staff also discuss methods of helping students in the transition 2  process from elementary school to middle school. Additionally, parent coordinators are trained to further assist students transitions from elementary to middle school. Guidance counselors provide Respect For All groups sessions to students and are available to ELL students for various issues concerning their transition to middle school or to the country. Throughout the school year our teachers are provided professional developments. Additionally, our ENL teacher receives ELL specific professional developments by attending meetings that are provided by the Department of Education, Division of English Language Learners. Several different activities that have been presented are the SIOP model and creating language specific objectives geared towards our ELLs. Another activity that was presented was using vocabulary strategies that will help ELLs buld their vocabulary skills. Recpords are maintaioned in a Professional Development binder by all teachers, including agendas and work done throughout the professional development period. We have instituted Common planning and PD time weekly for all teachers of ENL students. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? Teachers of JHS 292 have the opportunity to individually meet with parents of ELLs to discuss goals, language development, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs every Tuesdays between the hours of 2:40PM and 3:20 PM. The ESL teacher will schedule at least one additional meeting a year, in addition to parent-teacher conferences and other mandated meetings with all parents of ELLs. This meeting will include all staff members necessary to inform the parents about the child’s language development in all content areas in English. The parent coordinator schedules monthly meetings and all ELL parents are invited to attend these workshops. These meetings are conducted with interpreter/translator in the language or mode the parent best understands. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. We continue to work in the area of parent involvement. Parents participate in Open School night and they attend orientations, PTA meetings and our martial arts classes. The parent coordinator schedules monthly meetings and all ELL parents are invited to attend these workshops. Our ESL teacher, school aides and bilingual teachers assist with translation. However, we are also able to utilize the Translation and Interpretation Unit when needed. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Paste response here: 3 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Ahmed Edwards, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 4  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: Margaret S. Douglas School DBN: 19K292 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Evelyn Maxfield Title Principal Olga Stewart-Nelson Assistant Principal Juanita Jenkins Parent Coordinator Elanet Yusupov ENL/Bilingual Teacher Sylvia Joseph Parent Franceline Moore/ELA Teacher/Subject Area Yvonne Alleyene/ELA Teacher/Subject Area Tashica Mitchell Karen Wilson Coach Coach Ralph Williamston School Counselor Joyce Stallings-Harte Yasmin Torres NA NA NA Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member NA Other NA Other NA Other NA Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 11/1/15 11/1/15 11/1/15 11/1/15 11/1/15 11/1/15 11/1/15 11/1/15 11/1/15 11/1/15 11/1/15 11/1/15 11/1/15 11/1/15 11/1/15 5  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 19K292 School Name: JHS292 Superintendent: J. Stallings ha The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No (*Primary) * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. JHS 292 ensures that the Home Language Survey is administered to parents at registration by the ESL teacher, to determine the primary language spoken at home. Based on the responses to the Home Language Survey, the school ensures that translation and interpertation services are available in the languages identified. The school maintains appropriate and current records of primary language spoken by each parent, this infortmaion is maintained on ATS, Part III of the HLIS, and also on the studnets' emergency card. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. 6 Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Language JHSl 292's major written and oral interpertation needs focus on the languages of Arabic, Bengali, French, and Spanish. 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. Throughout the year there are many documents that Intermediate School 292 distributes and requires translation. These documents may consist of but, are not limited to important information about educational programs and services, newsletters, parent-teacher conference announcements, calendars with important dates, parent- engagement notification letters, and after-school program information. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide JHS 292 will typically have four formal face-to-face meetings with parents interpretation service(s)? 7  throughout the school year.The general Meet the Staff Night in Septemebr, three other parent-teacher conferences will take place in November, March, and May. However, throughout the year parents have the option of meeting with their childs' teacher every Tuesday between 2:40PM and 3:20 PM. Additionally, throughout the year there are many opportunities for teachers, deans, and guidance counselors to have informal interactions with the parents of our students. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) JHS 292 will ensure to fulfill parental notification requirements for translation and interepertaion services by postng the welcome poster in the front enternace of the school in different languages, and have translated copies of the Parents' Bill or Rights in their native langauge. Additionally, all parents will be given equal rights to reaching out to the administrative staff reguardless of their native language. Finally, all staff memebers including security desk and main office will have access to the Language ID Guide. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? 8  JHS 292 will will gather feedback from parents on the quality and availability of translatation services via parent suveys in their native languages. 9 
