 14K297 School Name: P.S. 297 ABRAHAM STOCKTON Principal: JAMES BROWN 2018-19 CEP-CS 1  Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC)   School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information The Abraham Stockton School PS 297 14K297 331400010297 School Number (DBN): Pre-Kindergarten, Kindergarten, Grade One, Grade Two, Grade Three, Grade Four and Grade Five 700 Park Avenue, Brooklyn, New York 11206 718-388-4581 Phone Number: 718-302-2315 Fax: James Brown Jbrown28@schools.nyc.gov Email Address: School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: James Brown Charles Rabbach CaridadTorres Charles Rabbach Diana Romeo OmariMcCleary District Information Geographical District: 14 Alicja Winnicki Superintendent: 215 Heyward Street, Brooklyn, New York 11206 Superintendent’s Office Address: awinnic@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718-302-7600 Phone Number: 718-302-7978 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC)   Brooklyn North Bernadette Fitzgerald FSC: Executive Director: 131 Livingston Street, Room 501 Brooklyn, New York 11201 Executive Director’s Office Address: Bfitzge2@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 718-225-5119 Phone Number: 718-935-4314 Fax:   Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) James E. Brown Charles Rabbach CaridadTorres Angelica Irizarry CaridadTorres OmariMcCleary Jessica Cashman Ebony Battles Sarah Rehberger *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/Teacher Member/ Teacher Member/ Teacher   Caridad Torres Allison Thomas Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Member/ Teacher Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/Parent Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/   Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with   the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement   Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? The Stockton Community School is a small community-based environment that accepts children of diverse talents and backgrounds. We aim to build 21st century citizens who are critical thinkers and problem solvers who collaborate effectively to creatively solve real-world problems.   2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. Our school is located in the Bedford-Stuyvesant section of Brooklyn. Many of our students live in the nearby Marcy and/or Tompkins Houses as well as in several Temporary Housing Residences in Brooklyn, Queens, and the Bronx. The Stockton School, P.S. 297 is a small Community School based environment that accepts children of diverse talents, backgrounds. We aim to build 21st Century citizens who are critical thinkers and problem solvers who collaborate effectively to creatively to creatively solve real-world problems. Our diverse student population here at the Stockton School, is comprised of 60% Latino students, 38% are African-American, 2% White. In recent years we have increased the number of Spanish-Speaking faculty members to provide the supports necessary for our growing population of Spanish-Speaking students and their families. We aim to close the pre-existing language barriers between home and school. Our Assistant Principal, Parent Coordinator, School Psychologist, and Social Worker are all bilingual as well as other members of our staff such as our Attendance Teacher, para-professionals and the English as a New Language teacher. We provide all written communication as well as automated voice messages in both English and Spanish. We provide parents with translation services during EP meetings, parent workshops, school/community events, registrations, etc. The Stockton School,P. S. 297 serves 204 students in grades Pre-K through grade five. We have 5 ICT classes total. One Pre-Kindergarten class, two kindergarten classes, and one class each of grades one through five. All classes are heterogeneous. We have one Cluster Teacher (Physical Education), an ENL Teacher, as well a part time Attendance Teacher. Our staff includes 10 Paraprofessionals, 1 Principal, 1 Assistant Principal, 1 Occupational Therapist, 1 Speech Therapist, and 1 Physical Therapist, 1 School-Based Support Team, 1 Guidance Counselor, 1 Social Worker, 1 Family Worker.  The Leader Me The Leader In Me whole school transformation process teaches students, teachers, and parents 21st century leadership and life skills, creates a culture of empowerment based on the idea that every child can be a teacher.  Community School Team/Good Shepherd Services Our Community School team is a host site agency (Good Shepherd Services) that works with our school to provide students with a high quality enrichment opportunities, mental health supports, Food Pantry, and other services. They provide students and families with on-site social and mental health services. The Community School Team will also provide health services, after-school programs, data tracking, vision services, family and community engagement. 0   New York Cares - has supported our students’ via monthly instruction with trips and a yearly out of state college tour, additional hands on lessons, donation of materials and volunteers who help the school via school beautification projects.  Special Events and Parent Engagement Field Day  Curriculum Night  Take Your Dads to School Day  Hispanic Heritage  Harvest Feast   Holiday Show  Celebrating Black History Month  P.S. 297 Instagram Page Super Leaders Day   Multi-Cultural Day  Parenting Journey Friday Night Lights   100th Day of School Celebration  Relay for Life    Middle School Admissions Process/Articulation Student-led conferences Leader In Me Professional Development 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. Our Title I Academic Intervention Program includes the general education ICT teachers. Their objective is to provide academic intervention for students, who are having problems meeting the demands of the Common Core State Standards and the new promotional requirements. We have a variety of federal, state and tax levy programs that provide these students with an extended platform to increase their chances of meeting the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. The programs we have are:  Title I Reading, Writing, and Mathematics for Grades K-2  Title I Reading/Mathematics Grades 3-5  All-Day Universal Pre-Kindergarten  ENL Program for ELL students  Good Shepherd After-School Program Third graders are considered for the Title I program based on teacher observations, student work, classroom and formal assessments, and Spring 2018 NYS assessment data, baseline MOSL assessments, and the child’s score on the grade two grade-wide reading assessment tests and running records. The children who scored level 1 on the New York State ELA Test must be serviced. We also aim to service those children who have scored Level 2 as well. 1  Students in grade five, who scored a Level 1 on the New York State ELA and the New York State Math exams are mandated to participate in our academic intervention services. Students in grade four, who scored a Level 1 on the New York State ELA and Math Test must be serviced. We also provide support services to those students who have scored a low Level 2 and a mid-to-high Level 2 to ensure that they don’t fall behind. Literacy- Grades Kindergarten through Second Academic Programs The instructional initiatives for Literacy include the implementation of the CKLA Whole Language Approach to reading and writing in grades PK-2.Core Knowledge Language Arts (CKLA) is a comprehensive, preschool through fifth grade program for teaching reading, writing, listening, and speaking while also building students’ vocabulary and knowledge across essential domains in literature, global and American history, and the sciences. In kindergarten through second grade, the CKLA literacy program is paired with a period of GRAIR (GRAIR periods are used to engage students in a variety of activities such as: Small Group Instruction Student Choice Time Building Background Knowledge (guided reading activities and center activities)    Target Vocabulary and Syntax  Fluency In kindergarten through second grade CKLA is broken into two strands—a Skills strand and a Listening & Learning strand—so that children can master sounds and letters for fluent decoding and encoding during one part of the day and then have additional time to build the knowledge, language, and vocabulary that are essential for strong comprehension. In pre-kindergarten CKLA engages students in skills-based fun activities such as: engaging read-alouds, favorite rhymes and songs, centers that boost language development while children play, and enjoyable ways to extend learning at home. Literacy- Grades Three through Five The instructional initiatives for Literacy include the implementation of the New York State Department of Education approved literacy program- Expeditionary Learning. Through Expeditionary Learning Students: Learn and practice collaborative structures and protocols to use throughout the units.   Gain academic and domain-specific vocabulary.  Deepen their capacity to read for and write and speak with evidence.  Write from sources about topics they understand deeply.  Develop a vision of quality work in collaboration with their peers and revise their own work accordingly. Our third through fifth grade students’ curriculum is enhanced and supported via an extra period of intervention daily. During the intervention and skills review period teachers engage students in a variety of activities such as: 2  Sustained Silent Reading with Reading Responses   Review of reading comprehension skills  Reading fluency  Close reading strategies  Note taking strategies  Text structures  Identifying genres Mathematics- Kindergarten through Grade Five The instructional initiatives for mathematics include the implementation of the Go Math program which combines 21st century educational technology with modern content, computer animations and interactive activities, as well as a variety of instructional videos to engage today’s learner. Our instructional maps for mathematics have been revised to include a weekly period dedicated to working on problem-solving strategies for multi-step word problems and another period for reviewing skills through center activities. All classes have been supplied with manipulatives so that they can conduct math workshops and create models for discovery and exploration. We stress the use of mathematical language in both discussions and writing to secure mathematical thinking. This is clearly evident in the student work produced when students engage with Math Exemplars which provide students with an opportunity to engage with rigorous CCLS-aligned mathematical tasks which asks students to:  Problem solve  Reason and prove with evidence  Communicate  Make connections  Represent mathematical concepts ENL We have one ENL teacher servicing 28 pupils who utilizes auditory, visual, and kinesthetic approach in the delivery of instruction. The programs that are used include Leveled Literacy Intervention from Fountas and Pinnell, word study from Words Their Way and Reading A-Z for guided reading. The instruction is delivered in small differentiated groups in a stand alone setting as well as integrated model for selected group of students based on their levels. Social Studies We will continue to follow the NYC K-8 Scope and Sequence as well as the NYS Social Studies standards. Classroom teachers provide social studies instruction via the several literacy units that are aligned to the social studies units outlined in the NYC Social Studies Scope and Sequence. Our school follows Core Curriculum Option B, which directs 3  teacher to provide instruction to students using trade books, primary sources and media to address all the units in the scope and sequence. The overarching themes covered in each grade are the following: Kindergarten- Self and Others Grade 1- My Family and Other Families: Now and Long Ago Grade 2- My Community and other US Communities Grade 3- Communities Around the World Grade 4- New York State and Local History Grade 5- The Western Hemisphere Science The purpose and focus of science education is to offer all students’ ways to understand, make predictions about, and adapt to an increasingly complex scientific and technological world. Students are given opportunities to model scientists’ methods of investigation through the implementation and incorporation of FOSS kits (guided experiments) into their science instruction . Art Materials for the Arts- (MFTA) Resident Artist Program Our school has partnered with Material for the Arts in an effort to improve our students interaction and interpretation of our rigorous curriculuma in literacy. We have adopted MFTA’s Residency program which bring Materials for the Arts to our school to enhance and reinforce curricula in math, science, social studies, and language arts. Eki's Famous– Dance Consultant P.S. 297 has partnered with Eki's Famous Inc. in order to provide our students with dance instruction for the SY 2017-2018. All students will receive dance instruction once a week for the Fall 2017 and Spring 2018 semesters. Students will then showcase their dance training via various school presentations. 4  FYREZONE- Media Consultant We have partnered with FYREZONE to provide an enrichment after-school program where students learn how to brand our school via the creation an original song, recording the song, filming footage at school events, and creating a documentary that highlights the different programs, learning opportunities, and student experiences at P.S. 297. Good Shepherds Services: The Compass Program (After-School at P.S. 297) Our Good Shepherd partnership provides much more than an after-school program for our students. They offer: Social-emotional development and counseling services  Academic intervention and enrichment   Purposeful recreation   Healthy interactions with peers and adults Safe space The PS 297 School-Parent Compact: Describes how the school and parents can work together cooperatively to provide for the successful education of the children. It lists school responsibilities as well as parent responsibilities. This document is signed by the teacher and parent at a Parent-Teacher Conference and kept on file. The Parent Advisory Committee : Which consists of the parents of children who are participants in Title 1 programs, meets a minimum of three times a year. The purpose of this committee is to create a link between the parents and Title 1 teachers, by keeping them informed about the programs and seeking their input into educational programs. Quarterly meetings of the executive board of the PTA and the principal take place. P.S. 297 has a Parent Coordinator whose duties and responsibilities include:  Increase parent involvement in the school by working closely with all school, community members, parents, teachers and all school community organizations. Serves as a facilitator for parent and school community concerns.   Conducts outreach to engage parents in their children’s education.  Convenes regular parent meetings and events around topics of key concerns to parents.   Maintains ongoing contact with community organizations that are involved with providing services to the Serves as a school liaison to Central parent and Regional parent support schools’ educational program. 5  Professional Development It is essential to ensure that teachers are provided with ongoing, high quality professional development to sustain and enhance their practice. Therefore, professional development is an integral and consistent priority and practice at P.S. 297. We aim to address the needs of our staff in order to ensure a focus on continuous learning and to create the conditions necessary for closing the achievement gap and improving the achievement of all students. Professional development design at our school is based on data, is derived from the experience, expertise and needs of the recipients (our teachers, school leaders, paraprofessionals, and other staff members). Professional Development topics include but are not limit (offerings change year to year depending on student, teacher, and parent needs): STARS Report cards  The Leader In Me School Reflection Protocol   Writing Clinics for Teachers  Developing effective and coherent lesson plans with built in scaffolds and differentiation  Refresher of CKLA Literacy grades K-2  Higher-Order Thinking Questions and Discussion Techniques in Literacy and Mathematics   Reciprocal Teaching Protocol in Literacy and Mathematics  Providing Effective and Actionable Feedback to Students  The Inquiry Process: Looking at Student Work Collaboratively (Refresher)  Math Exemplars  Engaging with Components of Danielson’s Framework for Teaching  ADVANCE Teacher Evaluation System  Understanding MOSL  Professional Book Studies   Curriculum Night   Chapter 408    Curriculum Mapping and Unit Planning  The Quality Review Process   Number Talks: How to Structure and Lead Proactive Mathematical Discussions (K-5)    Rigor In Instruction  Using Assessments in the Classroom Law Refresher and Chancellor’s Regulations Speech and Language Strategies for the General Education Classroom Lesson Studies in CKLA, Expeditionary Learning and Go Math Lesson Studies and Interventions Identifying Barriers to Instruction Inter-visitations Leading Lesson Studies/Peer Coaching Technology Technology is infused into all curricular areas through the use of in-classroom “mobile STEM carts” (computer carts) which have laptops for our students. Every classroom is also equipped with a Smart Board and classrooms have document cameras. Students have the opportunity to access the internet for research projects, interactive math activities, designing presentations and for translated versions of books for our ELL students. In addition, our school 6  was able to purchase a Mobile STEM Lab to be used for Science by securing a STEM grant for our school as well as two robots which will be programmed by students during classes that teach coding to third grade students. We have a Media Room that students and teachers can utilize for the creation of movie clips, media presentations, photography projects, etc. The room has desktop computers, a Smart Board, projector, sound system, green screen, and other technological equipment. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. The elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which we've made the most progress this past year are Strong Family-Community Ties and Trust. Our key areas of focus this year will be building on work done around trust and supportive environment as well as strengthening our practices around rigorous instruction and collaborative teacher work. 7  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 14K297 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration PK,0K,01,02,03,04,05 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 223 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 4 4 9 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 9 5 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) 9 School Composition (2017-18) 92.0% % Attendance Rate 91.5% % Reduced Lunch 10.3% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 2.2% 58.3% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 0.4% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 9.08 0% 10% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 30.6% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 96% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A NO N/A N/A NO Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A NO N/A N/A NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A YES High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 51 51 90.3% 0.4% 20.6% 38.1% 0.9% 2.2% 2 0% 5.2 26.6% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No NO N/A N/A N/A NO NO N/A N/A N/A NO N/A N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 8  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Upon analysis of our June Instructional Reports 2018, NYS Exam data reports, and end of year student running record data, we surfaced that students at every grade level were not exiting the grade reading at or above grade level, which in turn was affecting reading fluency and comprehension. School leaders in collaboration with different school stakeholders and teachers decided that the instructional focus this year would be improving reading proficiency via different initiatives, for example explicit instruction of vocabulary and word work. Areas of Strength:  Implementation of CCLS-aligned literacy curriculum (Core Knowledge Language Arts for Kindergarten, Grade One, and Grade Two students. Expeditionary Learning for grades three, four, and five.) Small group intervention for literacy across all grades   Consistent collaborative planning amongst grade teams  Strong writing instruction across all grades incorporating the Writing Workshop protocol Areas of Need:  RI.4.4 (Informational Text- Word Meaning)  RI.4.5 (Informational Text- Overall Structure)  RL.4.4 (Literary Text- Word Meaning)  L.5.4 (Determine Word Meaning) Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. 9  By June 2019, 35% of Black and Latino students in kindergarten through grade five will exit each grade reading on level by aligning instruction to CCLS in ELA, teachers collaborating across grade bands, use of research-based teaching practices (e.g. daily sustained silent reading, phonemic awareness activities, word attack and sight word strategies, etc.), offering appropriate intervention and remediation services (SPIRE & READING PARTNERS), teaching strategies for reading content area texts, and by monitoring progress through periodic assessments (e.g. F & P Running Records). 0  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Research-based Instructional Programs CKLA- (Core Knowledge Language Arts) The Core Knowledge Language Arts Listening and Learning Strand is designed to help students build the background knowledge and vocabulary critical to listening and reading comprehension. The decoding skills needed for future independent reading are taught separately in the Core Knowledge Language Arts Skills Strand. The two strands complement each other, building the requisite decoding and comprehension skills that comprise fluent, mature reading Expeditionary Learning: Expeditionary Learning is a rigorous literacy program where our students engage in daily opportunities for inquiry, critical thinking, and writing assessments. In these EL modules, students engage in original research and deep interdisciplinary investigations of rich academic topics, (Human Rights, Rain Forests, Sports, Literacy Across the World, etc.) using their learning to create authentic, high-quality academic products to share with outside audiences. EL lessons are designed to be implemented in a collaborative classroom. Throughout every module, students work together. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? K-2 Students 9/20/18-6/26/19 Classroom teachers ELL'S SWD'S Students Grades 3-5 ENL teacher RTI teachers Assistant Principal Classroom teachers 1  Engaging protocols (compelling structured activities) that give students the opportunity to collaborate have been integrated into lessons. Most protocols repeat a number of times throughout a module to ensure students become familiar with it. Strategy/Programs AIS Cycles - general education students and SWD's who meet selection criteria for the AIS program will receive daily small group (5-6 students) intensive instruction focused on selected CCLS standards students are deficient in. After 6 weeks of small group instruction students are assessed to surface remaining gaps in learning and understanding and next steps are determined. ENL Teacher - Integrated Model - ENL teacher will plan with grade teams and provide integrated instruction for selected ELL students during literacy and writing instruction. The ENL teacher will provide classroom teachers and students with research-based ESL strategies, visual supports, vocabulary development, and small group and one-on-one support. SWD's ELL's ENL teacher Assistant Principal SWD Lowest third (ELA) 6 week cycles Principal Assistant Principal AIS team ENL teacher Center Activities- Students in grades kindergarten through second grade engage in daily small group literacy activities that include but are not ELL students October 2018 - June 2019 ENL teacher 2 Classroom teacher Classroom Teachers limited to guided reading, silent reading, sight word practice, phonics remediation, read-alouds, word work, etc. Upper grade students engage in Guided Reading and Shared Reading Activities as well as word work during their ELA skills review period. K-2 Students October 2018-June 2019 Grade 3-5 Students October 2018-June 2019 3  Strategy/Structures to Support Change 4  Inquiry Process - grade teams as well as Academic intervention Services Team engage in the collaborative analysis of student reading data (F & P Running Records and CKLA skills assessments) using a common protocol (Surfacing Gaps Protocol). Teachers will surface gaps in student learning and teacher practice and select students that will receive targeted small group instruction to address gaps in learning. Teachers and Academic Intervention Services Instructors will collaboratively research strategies, lesson plan, and implement strategies for a 6 week cycle and then re-assess students to monitor progress. The assessment data will assess the efficacy of selected strategies as measured by student growth on reading levels. Parent Engagement Family Literacy Night- Parents will be invited to a Literacy Night. They will learn about their child's progress in reading and participate in interactive literacy activities shared with their children and classroom teachers. K-5 students Classroom teachers conti-nuous ELL's 6 week cycle Para-Professionals SWD's 30 instructional days ENL teacher Lowest third students Advanced students School leaders Classroom teachers Parents October 2018 January 2019 Students School Leaders Academic Intervention Services Team March 2019 May 2019 3b – Parent and Family Engagement 5  How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. We will continue to provide workshops for families aligned to literacy with a focus on increasing reading levels of students. Parents and guardians will be invited to Literacy Night Events every trimester (October, January, March and May) to engage in interactive reading activities with their children and learn how to support their child's growth in reading at home with shared strategies and resources. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. ● Per session funds to be used for AP-led teacher training on how to implement and engage in meaningful lesson studies into current teaching practices grounded in explicit instruction of vocabulary, reading comprehension, foundational skills in reading. ● Additional per-session funds to be used to train paraprofessionals on how to lead one-on-one and small group discussions to assist their charges. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal.  By January 30, 2019:  Students will show improvement (Up by a minimum of two reading levels) on the school-wide Middle of Year Running Records. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) - Fountas and Pinnel Benchmark Assessment System - Classroom Reading Assessments - Gates-MacGinitie Reading Tests (GMRT) - Rally Schoolwide Literacy Assesments Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 6  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? After a two year (2016-2018) trend analysis of Leader in Me student surveys and available student leadership opportunities within our school, we observed that there weren't sufficient student leadership opportunities available for our students and that there weren't enough entry points for students to participate in school-level decision making. We surveyed teachers as well and asked how we could improve our existing Student Lighthouse Team to ensure that students had a stronger voice and more opportunities to lead events and initiatives in our school. It was decided that our Student Lighthouse Team needed revisions and a more streamlined process for students to apply for leadership positions (jobs) within our school. Areas of Strength: - Some teachers exhibit strong classroom cultures where students exhibit leadership and take risks - Many students exhibit appropriate behaviors and engage in positive interactions with both peers and adults both in and out of the classroom. - Active student government program in the school where students represent their peers and advocate for their needs and share ideas with adult stakeholders - Leader in Me process has positively impacted school culture and has reduced the number of student discipline referrals. Areas of Need: - More student leadership within the school - student-centered instruction and activities - Strong character education and respect for all instruction - incentive program for leadership behaviors in students 7  Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, our school will experience a continued decrease of student discipline referrals and increased student voice and advocacy as a result of implementing our schoolwide behavior incentives program, L.E.A.D. Bucks, and the introduction our Student Lighthouse Team which will provide students with opportunities to apply for school jobs and take part in schoolwide decision-making . 8  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). StrategIes  Staff will receive training led by our staff Lighthouse Team on effective strategies for integrating Leader in Me Habits into existing curricula as well as how to increase student engagement and leadership opportunities within the classroom.  Community Director and Parent Coordinator collaborate  to revise the structure of Student Lighthouse Team as well as student job application process. L.E.A.D. Bucks incentive program- students receive LEAD Bucks for demonstrating the 7 Habits of Highly Effective People throughout the day. A schoolwide score board is kept to track monthly progress, class winners receive different awards per month. x x x Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All teachers 9/8/18-6/26/19 All students x x x - School leaders - Lighthouse Team - Student Lighthouse Team - Classroom Teachers - Community School Director - Parent Coordinator x x x x x x 3b – Parent and Family Engagement 9  How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. The Community School Director and the Parent Coordinator will collaborate to provide workshops for Parents and Guardians grounded in the 7 Habits of Highly Effective People as well as parental supports for assisting their children with academic assignments. Parents will also be invited to monthly celebrations to highlight their child's progress. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. - Purchase Order for Leader In Me program and professional development services from Leader in Me consultants - Per session funds to be used for training teachers on 7 Habits and incentives program as well as strategies for addressing negative and/or aggressive behaviors in the classroom. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal.  By January 2019, our school will be show a reduction in discipline referrals.  Increase in student participation and student leadership at events such as Student Lighthouse Team, Harvest Feast, Holiday Show, Black History Month, Career Day, Spirit Week, and End of Year Multi-Cultural Event. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Monthly Leader in Me Community School Leadership Events Parent Surveys Classroom Observations Student Lighthouse Led school events and initiatives Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 0  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Upon analysis of our June Instructional Reports (2018), NYS Exam data reports, and end of year student math performance tasks (2018), it was determined that constructed responses was an area in need of improvement. Students with disabilities, English Language Learners and Black and Latinos are specific sub-groups that need additional support and remediation in order to improve their responses to mathematical problems with multiple steps. Students struggle to explain in writing their solutions to the problem and incorporating and using mathematical vocabulary. ● Areas of Strength: - Implementation of CCLS-aligned mathematics curriculum (Go Math) for all grades (K-5) - Evidence of the use of rubrics by students to self-assess - Consistent collaborative planning amongst grade teams ● Areas of Need: - Question and Discussion Techniques - Incorporating higher-order thinking questions into classroom discussions and writing (DOK Levels 2-4) - Student centered instruction/center activities/small group instruction. - More opportunities for writing during math lessons and center time. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 100% of grade teams will collaboratively plan to mathematics instruction and activities that introduce and/or reinforce the use of structured math problem-solving strategies (e.g. C.U.B.E.S., Reciprocal Teaching, etc.) teach students how to deconstruct math problems, use of context clues and math vocabulary to increase reading comprehension of math word problems, in order to increase proficiency of constructed responses on the NYS 1  Mathematics assessment as evidenced by analysis of student data (inquiry cycles, periodic assessments, and teacher observations. 2  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Inquiry Cycles - Teacher grade teams will engage in the collaborative analysis of student work using a common protocol for analyzing student work. Teachers will use a baseline assessment at the beginning of a unit aligned to the CCLS in mathematics to be taught in the unit and analyze the student work using the Surfacing Gaps Protocol and surface the gaps in students learning. Teachers will select a target group of students based on baseline data (ELL's, SWD's, lowest third, Black or Latino boys) to focus on for the inquiry cycle who have shown similar deficiencies. They will then research strategies to support student learning in selected areas and design lessons collaboratively to address the needs of students. Lastly, they will assess the effectiveness of selected strategies at the end of the unit and measure student growth via end of inquiry cycle assessments. Reciprocal Teaching Protocol - Teachers will introduce students to the Reciprocal Teaching Protocol in mathematics in order to help students deconstruct math problems and understand how to write effectively to explain their thought process and solutions to math problems. The purpose of using this protocol is so that they can use the connections made during math-based classroom discussions to justify their thinking and write structured and coherent explanations to math problems. Adaptations will be made to the Reciprocal Teaching Protocol to address the needs of our ELL’s and SWD’s as well as the lower elementary grades. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? -SWD’s Continuous -Classroom Teachers -ELL’s] 6 Week Cycles - ENL Teacher - School Leaders - Para-professionals -Struggling students November 2018-June 2019 -Advanced students - K-5 Students -SWD’s -Fall 2018 through End of School Year 2019 -Classroom Teachers -ENL Teacher -Para-professionals -ELL’s -Struggling students 3  -Advanced students Math Exemplars - X -Classroom Teachers Teachers will integrate Math Exemplars (performance-based tasks) into existing Go Math curriculum. Problem-solving work time will be included in daily lessons at the beginning of the lesson and during weekly center activity time as well as during intervention periods. Classroom Teachers Students will have multiple opportunities during the week to discuss their thinking around math word problems independently, with their peers, and with the whole class as well as to explain their thinking in writing using appropriate mathematical vocabulary. Explicit instruction of vocabulary incorporated into daily math instruction. -ENL Teachers -Para-professionals N/A N/A N/A 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Teachers will use parent engagement time to model and share mathematical strategies used in the classroom to promote student understanding on how to solve multi-step math problems. Invite parents into the classroom for 4  math night activities which include participation in math center activities and the use of math-related applications on smart phones and tablets. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. ● Per session funds for teachers and Assistant Principal to be used for AP-led teacher training on how to incorporate the math discussion strategies (Intentional Talk book) into math lessons and lesson Studies into existing math curriculum. ● Additional per-session funds to be used to train paraprofessionals on how to lead one-on-one and small group discussions to assist in the classroom. Purchase Math Exemplars Digital Library for kindergarten through grade five classrooms. Purchase Generation Ready Math Consultant services to support the math initiatives and goals with grade teams and school leaders. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. ● By January 30, 2019 student work and teacher observations would have reflected an increase in students’ progress in writing strong responses to math word problems and their responses during classroom mathematical discussions. ● By January 30, 2019, teachers will engage in a mid-year data review and professional conversation with school leaders to discuss trends in student data and show student work samples to anchor the conversation with evidence. ● Teacher observation data will reflect an increase in effective ratings in the area of questioning and discussion techniques as a result of implementing the math exemplars, Reciprocal Teaching Protocol, and Intentional Talk discussion strategies as well as other strategies into their lessons. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. - Rally Assessments in Mathematics - M.O.S.L. Assessments - Classroom Observations 5  - Inquiry Cycle Assessment Data - Student Work Samples - Student Responses on Math Exemplars tasks Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 6  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. ● After conducting a two-year trend (2016-2018) analysis of student performance data on both NYS ELA and Mathematics assessments and school-based math assessments (2018), Quality Review feedback (2018), Principal Performance Observation feedback (2018), teacher observation data (2017-2018), MOSL data (2017-2018) and classroom observations it was determined that all student groups from kindergarten through fifth grade demonstrated deficiencies in explaining and justifying their thinking in writing on mathematical multi-step problems. The quality of instruction and questioning and discussion techniques was inconsistent and of low rigor in some classrooms. ●Teachers and school leaders engaged in a School Reflection Protocol (September 2018) to analyze our growth in the areas outlined in our school-wide goals for SY 2017-2018 and surface trends in data and school structures and practices. We noticed that we have to continue to develop our staff’s understanding of effective pedagogical practices in the area of teaching mathematics, questioning and discussion techniques, differentiation, and student engagement. ● Areas of Strength: - Evidence of the use of rubrics by students to self-assess after professional development led by assistant principal on the use of formative assessments to increase student engagement and assessment. - Consistent collaborative planning amongst grade teams using the Common Core Learning Standards as the basis for professional conversations around student work and assessment as modeled by assistant principal during fishbowl modeling during grade meetings and inquiry work training led by assistant principal. ● Areas of Need: - Strong targeted discussions during mathematics instruction - Making revisions to existing math curricula to focus on research-based strategies for solving math problems and go deeper in selected strategies to ensure mastery - Student centered instruction via the use of center activities, small group instruction, and student-led modeling and peer assessment - Community and trust building activities to build confidence, trust, and leadership in students Part 2 – Annual Goal 7  Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, school leaders will engage 100% of staff in a variety of school-wide professional learning activities (small and whole group) in a variety of topics such as: Culturally Responsive Teaching Strategies, Discussions in the Math Classroom, Word Work, Writing Clinics, Increasing Student Engagement, and others in order to strengthen teacher pedagogy, build capacity and provide leadership opportunities for teachers. 8  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Professional Book Study - All classroom teachers -Fall 2018 -Principal -Assistant Principal - teacher leaders Teachers will engage in a book study, with the book, "intentional Talk" as the central text in order to improve mathematical discussions in the elementary classroom. The book study will focus on the 6 discussion strategies outlined in the "Intentional Talks" book. Grade teams will meet to write a team lesson and then will teach the lesson, each grade member will get to inter-visit with their grade colleagues to observe the team lesson in each of the grade classrooms and record observations and/or wonderings and questions. The team will then meet to debrief and share low-inference observations and plan for next steps before experimenting with other discussion strategies. Intentional Talk book - This book shares strategies on how to structure and lead productive mathematical discussions.” Teachers will engage in conversations about which strategies work best along with the Reciprocal Teaching Protocol they will choose to implement with their students and plan lessons collaboratively. X X X X Curriculum Mapping - Teachers will engage in collaborative curriculum planning and make necessary adjustment and revisions to current mathematics curriculum in order to meet the needs of all learners and increase the rigor and coherence. Grade Teacher Teams -Fall 2018 -Grade Teams -ENL Teacher Continuous adjustments -Principal 9  N/A 3b – Parent and Family Engagement throughout the year -Assistant Principal N/A N/A N/A How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Invite parents to participate in problem-solving Wednesdays or on Center Fridays so that parents can get hands-on learning experiences on the pedagogy behind instructional practices used in math classrooms. Parent Coordinator along with classroom teachers will host Math Night to learn more about math curriculum, problem-solving strategies, and online resources they can use at home to support their children. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. ● Use purchase orders to purchase a professional book for staff for our professional book club – Intentional Talk by Allison Hintz and Elham Kazemi ● Per-session funds for AP and teacher planning. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. ● By January 30, 2019, teachers will have implemented a minimum of three strategies for mathematical classroom discussions learned via the professional book club (Intentional Talk) including the Reciprocal Teaching Protocol in mathematics as evidenced by participation in professional conversations, teacher observation data, student work sample, student assessment data, and others. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. - Rally Assessments in Mathematics - Classroom Observations - Inquiry Cycle Assessment Data - Student Work Samples 0  - Student Responses on Math Exemplars tasks Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 1  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. ● As per our End of Year ATS Attendance Report (June 2018) we achieved an overall 91 % Attendance rate for the SY 2017-2018 school year. Areas of Strength: - Host Monthly Parent and/or Community Events - Host Monthly Assemblies - Attendance Incentives Program - Daily Parent Outreach for Absences - Multiple methods of communication for parents, i.e.; Weekly Golden Ticket, Written and Translated, REMIND APP for school-parent communication - School Instagram Page -notices for parents, automated phone calls, teacher outreach, PTA parent newsletter, Monthly School Calendar, monthly principal parent letter, and others. - Mental health services for students and families on site - Academic support for students after-school - Enrichment programs for students after-school - Art classes during instructional day and after-school - Community School Team to address parents' needs and concerns and provide necessary resources - Established Attendance Team Areas of Need: 2  - Increase student attendance and overall school attendance - Decrease student lateness - Parent Engagement and Involvement in school activities and decision-making Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. ● Attendance: Monthly School Wide Average Attendance of 92% OR 70% of students ( approx. 130 students ) Tier 1 (>90% YTD) AND 5% of students (approx. 10 student) Tier 3 (<80% YTD)  Parent Engagement: To host 10 Family Engagement Workshop Events including the annual Family Forum with (approx. attendance of 40 family representatives)  *Community Support: To offer material support to school families through GSS Afterschool/Summer Camp, Foodbank Food Pantry, Warby Parker Vision, Friday Night Lights, All4One Employment/Housing Support  Mental Health Support: To establish or continue counseling relationship with 30 students (& families), and schedule 3 mental health related workshops for either teachers or parents in conjunction with our DOMNH School Mental Health Consultant. 3  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Celebratory Events - school community will host monthly academic and attendance awards ceremonies to reward students for academic excellence and improvement. REMIND APP- an online application used to provided home-school communication between school personnel and parents Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? -Parents Monthly -School leaders - Students -Community School Team -Attendance Team -Parent Coordinator -PTA members -Parent Volunteers - Parent and Community members -Teachers weekly monthly -School Leaders - Community School Director - Parent Coordinator Monthly Leadership/Community Events Parents Monthly -Classroom Teachers Different committees will be formed to plan, prepare, and host monthly academic, social, or celebratory events. For example: Community Members - Hispanic Heritage Celebration - Harvest Feast -Attendance Awards/Most Improved - Holiday Show - others - Community School Team - Parent Coordinator - Community Assistant - School Leadership Team - Lighthouse Team - PTA 4 School Instragram Page parents Fall 2018 Community School DIrector community members To be updated by our Community School Director. It will contain information about upcoming events, pictures of school and community events, and community school resources. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. Good Shepherd Services Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. ● Parent/School Event Planning Committee - a committee comprised of parents, teachers, volunteers, and school leaders will meet regularly to plan and organize various school and community events. ● Time for all teacher teams to engage in planning for parent engagement activities ● Materials for hosting parent engagement activities. ● Incentives for parents and students for participating in school events. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. ● By January 30, 2019 teachers would have developed and engaged in a minimum of at least four parent engagement activities. ● Beginning in September 2018 and ending in June 2019, teachers will engage in monthly parent engagement activities. ● Teachers will meet with school leaders once a month to review parent engagement activities and receive feedback. ● Parent Attendance at school and community events will increase as evidenced by sign-in sheets and parent participation at school events. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. 5  - Parent Attendance at school events - New Parent Volunteers - Parent-Led Initiatives - Parent feedback on school surveys Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 6  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) - All students including ELL’s and students with disabilities who score Level 1 or 2 on the NYS ELA exam - students who do not meet the meet the academic requirements for their current grade - When students are referred by the School Implementation Team and are in need of academic support Mathematics - All students including ELL’s and students with IEP’s who score Level 1 or Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) -CKLA Assessment & Remediation guides (Grades K-2) - intervention periods five days a week - Guided Ready Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) During the school day - Small group pull-out (5-6 students, intensive and targeted instruction for thirty minutes daily. - one-on-one support using Response to Intervention Strategies inside of the classroom. - Explicit Vocabulary Instruction and Word Work - MyOnDigital Library for all students to access at school and at home for independent reading on their reading level. - Reading Partners (one-on-one tutoring program for struggling readers) -Think Central (online support system for Go Math program) - small group intervention in the classroom provided by classroom teacher - Small grouppull-out (5-6 students, intensive and targeted instruction During the school day 7  Science 2 on the NYS Math exams -Go Math Tier I, II, and III interventions for thirty minutes daily. - When students are referred by the School Implementation Team and are in need of academic support - EXEMPLARS performance-based assessments -problem-solving strategies for solving word problems - one-on-one support using Response to Intervention Strategies - All students including ELL’s and students with IEP’s who scored a Level 1 or 2 on NYS 4th Grade Science Exam -classroom assessment data -teacher observation -Early childhood and upper grades use guided reading and small group activities that include open-ended questions based on the topics addressed in the NYC Scope and Sequence. - hands-on activities addressing major standards and process skills addressed on the NYS 4 th Grade Science Exam -- small group intervention in the classroom provided by classroom teacher -- small group intervention in the classroom provided by classroom teacher - Hands-on science (experiments and project) instruction provided by after-school teachers. - visual aids and differentiated graphic organizers - close reading strategies for non-fiction text -Early childhood and upper grades use guided reading and small group activities that include open-ended questions based on the topics addressed in the NYC Scope and Sequence for Social Studies - interactive word walls -- small group intervention in the classroom provided by classroom teacher -visual aids and differentiated graphic organizers Social Studies - All students including ELL’s and students with IEP’s who score a Level 1 or 2 on NYS Exam in ELA -classroom assessment data -teacher observation During school day After-school During the school day 8  -interactive word walls -individual sessions -group sessions During the school day and during after-school program provided by Community School social workers - hands-on activities addressing major standards andskills addressed on the NYS ELA exam - close reading strategies for non-fiction text Different counseling strategies or protocols depending on students’ individual needs (i.e. music therapy, play therapy, girls group, boys group, peer mediation, etc.) provided by social workers, psychologists, and guidance counselor. At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) - When students are referred to the School Implementation Team by school leaders or classroom teachers and are in need of social, emotional, or psychological support 9  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 54 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. Academic Intervention Services, Social-Emotional Support and Counseling Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 0  N/A 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. N/A 1  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. ● The pupil personnel/payroll secretary will work closely with the Field Support Center Human Resources representative that non-HQT meet all required documentation and assessment deadlines. ● Mentors (internal and external) are assigned to support struggling and un-qualified teachers. ● Instructional coaches are paired with struggling teachers. ● In-house professional development opportunities to be offered for all members of the teaching community, especially for our new staff. ● Weekly grade meetings and monthly professional development sessions are conducted covering a variety of topics, including but not limited to: differentiated instruction, Common Core Learning Standards, unit planning, formal and informal observation guidelines, all curriculum related areas, and student support instructional activities. ● Teachers attend off-site DOE professional development sessions to enhance their professional practice. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). ● Mentors (internal and external) are assigned to support struggling and un-qualified teachers. ● In-house professional development opportunities to be offered for all members of the teaching community,especially for our new staff. ● Weekly grade meetings and weekly PD are conducted covering a variety of topics, including but not limited to: differentiated instruction, Common Core Learning Standards, unit planning, formal and informal observation guidelines, all curriculum related areas, and student support instructional activities. 2  - professional learning communities around different content (i.e. questioning and discussion techniques, analyzing student work, using data to drive instruction, math discussions in the elementary classroom, reciprocal teaching, math exemplars and problem-solving techniques, etc.) - Data clinics - lesson study - professional book study - inter-visitations - teachers-help-teachers initiative - peer coaching cycles - Generation Ready consultant coaching for grade teams around math and science Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). ● Parent Workshops: Transitioning to Kindergarten ● Coffee with the Principal: Expectations for Kindergarten students and parents ● Incorporation of CCLS-aligned literacy programs (CKLA) and mathematics curriculum into everyday instruction 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments 3  Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. ● MOSL Committee comprised of teachers who represent all constituencies and school leaders meet to review available assessment options, discuss pros and cons, vote on periodic, baseline, and end of year assessments and then decisions are shared with the whole school community. - Grade teacher teams are consulted as well as the School Leadership Team before any curriculum decisions are made including purchasing or adopting new materials or curricula. ● On-going professional development for teachers around existing curriculum to strengthen understanding and improve implementation practices. - School participates in annual reflection protocol to analyze all areas of instruction and assessment, discuss successes and challenges regarding school curricula, assessments, data, daily practices, instructional practices, student performance and discuss areas of strength and growth and draft collective feedback and next steps for goal setting. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Column B Verify with an (X) Section Reference(s) Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local Unknown Unknown Unknown Unknown Unknown $183,464.00 $115,459.00 $ 0 $ 0 $1,155,032.00 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, 4  State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.  5   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 6  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. P.S. 297 Abraham Stockton, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. The Stockton School will support parents and families of Title I students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students  providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology;  providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and  decision making in support of the education of their children; fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress;  providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments;  sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; (i.e. Golden Ticket is distributed every Tuesday to parents. Coffee with the Principal is held every month for parents)  providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; 7  Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will:  Actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact;  Engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills;  Ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and  strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; Support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills;  Maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.;  Conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home;  Provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report;  Host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the ESSA; Schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; (i.e. Coffee with the Principal)   Translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed;  Conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement  Holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference;  Hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; 8   Encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; Supporting or hosting Family Day events;   Establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents;  Encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers;  Providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress;  Developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress;  Providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) School-Parent Compact (SPC) The Stockton School, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by:  Using academic learning time efficiently;  Respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences;   Offering high quality instruction in all content areas;  providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required Implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by:  Conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related;  Convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved;  Arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting;  Respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education;  Providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; Involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact;   Providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; 9   Ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff  Ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents;  Notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member;  Arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities;  Planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; Provide general support to parents by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents  Creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians;  Assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); Sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; Supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents;   Ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as  described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy;  Advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs;  Monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent;  Ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities and his/her age;  Check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary;  Read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes);   Promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports Set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; and/or quality family time;  Encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child;  Volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits;  Participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education;  Communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district;  Respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested;  Become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact;  Participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; 0   Take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; Share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child;  Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities  Attend school regularly and arrive on time;  Complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; Follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions;  Show respect for myself, other people and property;   Try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully;  Always try my best to learn. 1  Addendum: Community School Partnerships Directions: The Community School (CS) strategy is directly aligned to the Framework for Great Schools. Community Schools bring schools and community partners together and integrate academics, health, youth development, and family engagement to provide students with the tools and opportunities they need to succeed. The Core Services in Community Schools are Expanded Learning Time (ELT), Attendance Supports, Family Engagement, and Health & Wellness. Part 1 – Community School Partnerships Goal(s) How is the CS strategy integrated into academic instruction at your school, and what impact has it had on student academic outcomes? As a community school, we focus on providing a strong social-emotional support system for the students, incorporating all members of the school community as opposed to exclusively mandated counseling and support services team at the school. Good Shepherd Services provides 1 on1 counseling and peer support for students (throughout the day and during after-school) to address social-emotional struggles that inhibit academic success, as well as peer and adult interactions. We have also combined these efforts with our absenteeism interventions in order to address barriers to healthy school attendance. In an effort to build a learning alliance between school and families and integrate cultural responsiveness into instruction, Good Shepherd Services has integrated their Youth and Family Development approach into 297’s parent communication and engagement. GSS facilitates and organizes 10 family workshops and events, including the annual Family Forum which utilizing appreciative inquiry to access feedback from families. GSS also coordinates school to family communication through coordination of the REMIND digital application and the Parent Teacher Home Visit Program. GSS was also instrumental in bringing Adult Education into our school, which was a request made at last year’s annual Parent Forum. For SY 18-19, we utilized Community Schools to purchase the on-site services of “Reading Partners” a children’s literacy nonprofit that delivers individualized reading tutoring to students. Utilizing the New Visions Data Portal we have been able to target students in need of this literacy intervention. All of these efforts and others have enhanced aspects of 297’s school culture, such as reducing absenteeism, improving social interactions in the classrooms, increasing student-led activities, as well student and family participation and leadership in classroom and school. Indicate the summative goal(s) of the Community School for the 2018-19 school year. Be sure to construct the goal to be SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Realistic, and Time-bound.  Attendance: Monthly School Wide Average Attendance of 92% OR 70% of students ( approx. 130 students ) Tier 1 (>90% YTD) AND 5% of students (approx. 10 student) Tier 3 (<80% YTD)  Parent Engagement: To host 10 Family Engagement Workshop Events including the annual Family Forum with (approx. attendance of 40 family representatives)  Community Support: To offer material support to school families through GSS Afterschool/Summer Camp, Foodbank Food Pantry, Warby Parker Vision, Friday Night Lights, All4One Employment/Housing Support  Mental Health Support: To establish or continue counseling relationship with 30 students (& families), and schedule 3 mental health related workshops for either teachers or parents in conjunction with our DOMNH School Mental Health Consultant. Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Community School Annual Goal(s): How will achieving your Community School Goal(s)--in Expanded Learning Time (ELT), Attendance Supports, Family Engagement, and Health & Wellness--support your academic goals for students? 2  Children who attend Title 1 schools such as ours are two to three times more likely to be chronically absent—and often face the most harm because their community lack resources to make up for the lost learning in school. These absences are tied to family health problems, such as asthma, oral and mental health issues. Other barriers including housing instability, lack of childcare, an unsafe route to school or food insecurity make it difficult to go to school every day. We use up to date chronic absence data, and family workshops as a diagnostic tool to identify where prevention and early intervention are needed. We then can leverage our partnerships, as well as community school staff to develop a school-wide school culture where students and families feel connected and know that someone notices, in a caring manner, when they missed school. Another component of our strategy is helping families understand the effects of chronic absenteeism on long-term student succes Part 2 – Community School Partnerships Core Services Action Plan Part 2a. Identify the Community-based Organization (CBO) partnerships that you will develop in ELT, Attendance Supports, Family Engagement, and Health & Wellness, their target student population(s), and scope of the services provided. As well as supporting schools’ supportive environment and attendance work, CBOs should be helping to support your school’s instructional focus. CBO Partnership Target Population Scope of X Part 3 – Budget and Resource Alignment X Service X SY18-19 SMART Goal X Part 3a. Indicate resources your Community Partnership will leverage to achieve your summative SMART goal(s) and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Our school will need continued support from the Office of Community Schools providing connections with different NYC organizations such as HRA, Singlestop, etc. Part 3b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) Title I SWP Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 3c. Describe how the school will partner with the Lead CBO to do the following: 1. Community Schools are expected to partner with a community-based partner organization (CBO) and together with members of the School Leadership Team, hire a Community School Director. The Director will lead implementation of the asset and needs assessment process, and other critically important coordinating activities. Indicate how you will leverage this aspect of the work. Community Schools are expected to personalize the needs of all students, through strategic programming and services, as determined by the asset and needs assessment, and must also offer Expanded Learning Time (ELT) and mental health programming. In completing this section, ensure that you think about how: (1) the right services are provided to the right students and families at the right time; and (2) how you will seamlessly coordinate services with instructional programming happening throughout and outside of the school day. 2. 3  3. 4. Indicate how you will implement this work, and describe other programming you anticipate to be in place to strengthen this initiative. Community Schools are expected to emerge as Partnership Schools, which are places where parents and families feel welcome, actively participate in the conversation and decision-making around the renewal of their schools, and have many opportunities to advocate for their children. Monthly meetings and Community School Forums engaging families and community stakeholders will be a critical part of this family engagement strategy. Describe how you will implement this aspect of the work. Community School Principals are expected to meet on a weekly basis with their Community School Director, select Assistant Principals, key staff, and other CBOs, to analyze trends in data and case manage individual students. Data tools – including the New Visions Data Sorter - and training will be available for schools to use. Indicate how you will implement this aspect of the work. 1. Community School Director will be co-lead with Parent Coordinator the coordination of all material support programs, parent involvement, attendance interventions, mental health support, and family enrichment. 2. Community School Team use needs assessment, outcomes from the annual parent forum and formal and informal observations to intentionally connect students and families to services and offerings. These are integrated into the existing school schedule during appropriate periods, as well utilizing afterschool hours, and evening extended building use programming. 3. Community School Director assists the PTA with facilitation with monthly meetings, as well as the Parent Lighthouse Team that hosts monthly development workshops, and nominates parents to School Leadership Team. All of these committees convene to plan the parent forum and debrief outcomes. 4. The Principal and Community School Director and Parent Coordinator hold a weekly meeting. New Vision Data Sorter is used for weekly Attendance Meeting with Attendance Teacher, Parent Coordinator and Community School Team. Part 4 – Community School Partnerships Oversight Part 4a. Key Staff and Partners 1. Name and describe the scope of involvement of all community partners working in the school (include partners supporting ELT, counseling, enrichment, etc.) 2. Name the members of your Community School Team and how meetings will be organized and structured to engage all stakeholders and be focused on results. 3. Explain data strategies including the use of the data sorter, and steps that the school will take to ensure that the appropriate interventions are provided to the right students 1. Good Shepherds-Community School Team (Director. Social Worker, 3 Social Work Interns) Good Shepherds -After-school and Summer Camp ChildCare Office of Adult Continuing Education- GED and ESL classes Reading Partners- Children’s Literacy Tutoring FoodbankNYC- Food Assistance, Nutrition Education NYC Department of Health Asthma Case Management Program All 4 One Resources- Employment, Housing, and Neighborhood Empowerment Grand Street Settlement- Tompkins Community Center: Evening Enrichment 4  New York City Football Club “City in the Community”- Soccer Enrichment Material for the Arts- Art Enrichment Digital Girls Inc- Coding and Technology Enrichment Kids In the Game- Fitness Anahsa Consulting-Family Development Workshops Smile NY- Dental Services Warby Parker-Vision Services 2. Community School Team consists of Principal, Teachers Union Rep, 2 Parents, Community School Director 4. New Vision Portals Coordinates which student meet with counseling services, receives academic tutoring and is used to confirm attendance recognition and awards. Part 4b. Indicate resources needed including human resources, instructional resources, and schedule adjustments to implement the Community School program. Community School Director, Social Worker, Success Mentors, Interns. Part 4c. Timeline for implementation and completion, including start and end dates. September 6, 2018 through June 26, 2019. Part 4d. Mental Health Work Plan Separate from this S/CEP, schools will complete a Mental Health Work Plan that will become an addendum to this document. 5  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 14 School Name The Stockton School (PS 297) Borough Brooklyn School Number 297 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal James E. Brown Coach N/A ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Pending Teacher/Subject Area Charles Rabbach Teacher/Subject Area N/A Related-Service Provider N/A Superintendent Alicja Winnicki Assistant Principal Galia Espinal Coach N/A School Counselor Jessica Cashman Parent Caridad Torres Parent Coordinator Angelica Irizarry Field Support Center Staff Member Sylvia Gimenez Other (Name and Title) N/A C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 0 1 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 206 6 Total number of ELLs 23 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 11.17%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 1 2 4 3 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? The current tools used at PS 297 are Fountas & Pinnell Running Records, Words Their Way Spelling Inventory, CKLA aligned Concepts of Print, First Fifty Sight Words (grade dependent), teacher created assessments, MOSL, and Performance Task (all grades). This data provides information regarding students current levels of performance in reading (fluency and comprehension), phonemic awareness, and writing (focused task). We will align this data to our school’s Comprehensive Plan. In supporting our school plan, this data measures our ELL students’ abilities to use evidence to support class discussions and produce writing pieces that uses evidence to form or make arguments. MOSL data is used to determine the student growth. The data from all these tasks show that the ELL students are performing similar to their peers. The Ell's with disabilities are also performing similar to non Ell's with disabilities. We have noticed that the ELL reading levels are lower than their peers. The Ell's receive Leveled Literacy Intervention and Response to Intervention.. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? 7  Goal setting and action planning activities will take place involving the language allocation planning team, SLT, curriculum mapping team, and school leaders to address the needs of ELL's surfaced via analysis of the data. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? The ENL program success is measured based off ongoing assessments which include running records and monthly assessments. In addition three benchmarks are given throughout the year (2017), in the beginning of the year to establish a baseline, in the middle of the year to monitor progress and at the end of the year to measure the growth throughout the year. At the beginning of each year we are able to analyze the NYSELAT, NYSELA, NYSMATH results and see the achievements of the ELL population. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? Currently, we have intervention and remediation cycles in literacy provided throughout the week. These interventions include ELL students who are in need of academic support in literacy. The students receive intensive phonics, skills, sight word, and guided reading support during these small group intervention sessions. The ENL teacher also provides an integrated model to support the ENL students during literacy and math blocks where applicable. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] In implementing RTI approaches with ELLs the first step is to determine the student’s knowledge and skills in their first language, and then understand their performance in their second language. Sub-groups are created based on student ability to demonstrate the capacity to acquire reading skills (low to high). Ongoing professional development must be done to ensure that appropriate decisions for interpreting, screening, and assessments results are used to design intervention (PD for general education teachers, special education teachers, and ENLs teachers). Progress monitoring should also be done at each Tier level. For each English language learner who scores below specified levels of performance on the annual English language proficiency assessment, the school must determine the additional support services to provide for the student, taking into consideration evidence such as the following: Number of years of instruction in a bilingual education or English as a new language program • English and home language literacy • Content area and socio-emotional support needs of students with inconsistent/interrupted formal education (SIFE) • English and home language literacy needs of long-term ELLs • Results on the annual English language proficiency assessment exam • Bilingual education or English as a second language teacher recommendation • Content area teacher recommendation • Parent or guardian request • Sample of student work in English and, if possible, in the home language • Bilingual educational evaluation, if the student has or is suspected of having a disability The support services provided must be aligned to any intervention plans (e.g., Academic Intervention Services) the school is already providing to all students. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) Criteria for determining AIS services Type of Program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.)Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.)When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) English Language Arts (ELA) : - Students who score Level 1 or 2 on the NYS ELA exam - When students are referred by the School Implementation Team and are in need of academic support - Reading A-Z literacy program -Ready CCLS practice books -CKLA Assessment & Remediation guides (Grades K-2) - Close reading strategies (Grades 3-5) - Reciprocal Teaching Protocol (Grades K-5) -Newsela.com. -adjust their reading levels so that they all have access to the non - fiction text - daily assessment of their reading comprehension through a short, four-question quiz. 8  -Individual reports may be printed or sent to parents. - Small group instruction - Pull-out / push-in SETSS model - One-on-one support using Response to Intervention Strategies - All done during the school day Mathematics : -Ell's Students who score Level 1 or 2 on the New York State Math exams - When students are referred by the School Implementation Team and are in need of academic support -Think Central (online support system for Go Math program) -Go Math Tier I, II, and III interventions - EXEMPLARS performance-based assessments -Problem-solving strategies for solving word problems - Small group instruction - pull-out / push-in SETSS model - one-on-one support using Response to Intervention Strategies Science : - Level 1 or 2 on New York State 4th Grade Science Exam -Classroom assessment data -Teacher observation -Early childhood and upper grades use guided reading and small group activities that include open-ended questions based on the topics addressed in the New York City Scope and Sequence. - Hands-on activities addressing major standards and process skills addressed on the New York State 4th Grade Science Exam - Close reading strategies for non-fiction text - Small group pullout/push in model with science cluster teacher All done during school day Social Studies: -Classroom assessment data -Teacher observation -Early childhood and upper grades use guided reading and small group activities that include open ended questions based on the New York City Scope and Sequence 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. The data revealed that 100% of the kindergarten students are entering in their language ability. As we look at each grade the data reveals that most of the ELL population is expanding. On the NYSESLAT 11.5 %are entering, 3.8% are transitioning, 34.6% expanding, and 50% are commanding. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? Data results will be shared and analyzed with the School Leadership Team as well as grade teams and all stakeholders will brainstorm and draft goals and action plans to address areas of need surfaced in the data. Support from the FSC's ELL's Instructional and Support Specialist as needed. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students 9  regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. The organizational models of PS 297 are the integrated and stand alone ENL. Students are grouped heterogeneously using best practices in differentiated instruction. In the ENL intergrated and stand alone program, the ENL teacher works with the classroom teacher to provide ESL instruction using ENL methodologies and data (reading levels, Words Their Way Spelling Inventory). The students are provided ENL services in accordance CR Part I54 mandates. ENGLISH PROFICIENCY LEVEL ENTERING (Beginning) EMERGING (Low Intermediate) TRANSITIONING (Intermediate) EXPANDING (Advanced) COMMANDING (Proficient) LANGUAGE ARTS STAND-ALONE ENL 1 unit of study in ENL (180 min.) .5 unit of study in ENL (90 min.) INTEGRATED ENL 1 unit of study in ENL/ELA (180 min.) 1 unit of study in ENL/ELA (180 min.) .5 unit of study in ENL/ELA (90 min.) 1 unit of study in ENL/ELA or other Content Area (180 min.) FLEXIBILITY .5 unit of study can be STAND-ALONE ENL or INTEGRATED ENL/Content Area (90 min.) .5 unit of study can be STAND-ALONE ENL or INTEGRATED ENL/Content Area (90 min.) .5 unit of study per week of INTEGRATED ENL in ELA/Content Area, or other approved Former ELL services for two additional years* TOTAL 360 minutes per week 360 minutes per week 180 minutes per week 180 minutes per week HOME LANGUAGE ARTS 1 HLA Class 1 HLA Class 1 HLA Class 1 HLA Class BILINGUAL INSTRUCTION BILINGUAL CONTENT AREA SUBJECTS Minimum of 2 Minimum of 2 Minimum of 1 Minimum of 1 STAFFING/ PERSONNEL K-8 BILINGUAL EDUCATION PROGRAM • (K-6 Bilingual) Common Branch teacher with a bilingual extension • (7-8 Bilingual) Content Area teacher with a bilingual extension. [HLA must be taught by a certified Language Other Than English teacher.] K-8 ENGLISH AS A NEW LANGUAGE PROGRAM • (K-8 STAND-ALONE) ESOL certified teacher • (K-6 ENL) Common Branch K-6 teachers with a bilingual extension can teach the ENL component of a K-6 Bilingual Education program. • (7-8 ENL) Integrated ENL can be taught by an ESOL teacher with Content Area certification or two individually certified teachers. The maximum allowable grade span for grouping instruction in grades K-12 English as a new language or bilingual education classes is two contiguous grades, except for English language learners in a special class, as defined by section 200.1(uu) of this Title. All programs must be provided during the school day. Please Refer to Chart on NYYSED CR Part 154-2. . b. TBE program. If applicable. N/A c. DL program. If applicable. N/A 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? We ensure that explicit ENL, ELA, and Native Language Arts (NLA) instructional minutes are delivered to our heterogeneous cohorts in each program model as per CR part 154 by using a large group push-in instructional approach. a)The ELL students that have obtained a entering or emerging proficiency level receive 360 minutes of weekly instruction. The students that have obtained an transitioning and expanding proficiency level receive 180 minutes of weekly instruction. ENL methodologies are incorporated in all content areas using the CALLA and SIOP models. In addition, various differentiated instruction (DI) techniques are integrated to promote optimal achievement. These techniques are combined with the use of visual aids and the use of Total Physical Response (TPR) techniques to support language acquisition. ENGLISH PROFICIENCY LEVEL ENTERING (Beginning) EMERGING (Low Intermediate) TRANSITIONING (Intermediate) EXPANDING (Advanced) COMMANDING (Proficient) LANGUAGE ARTS STAND-ALONE ENL 1 unit of study in ENL (180 min.) .5 unit of study in ENL (90 min.) INTEGRATED ENL 1 unit of study in ENL/ELA (180 min.) 1 unit of study in ENL/ELA (180 min.) .5 unit of study in ENL/ELA (90 min.) 1 unit of study in ENL/ELA or other Content Area (180 min.) FLEXIBILITY .5 unit of study can be STAND-ALONE ENL or INTEGRATED ENL/Content Area (90 min.) .5 unit of study can be STAND-ALONE ENL or INTEGRATED ENL/Content Area (90 min.) .5 unit of study per week of INTEGRATED ENL in ELA/Content Area, or other approved Former ELL services for two additional years* TOTAL 360 minutes per week 360 minutes per week 180 minutes per week 180 minutes per week 0  3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. In the Free Standing ENL model instruction is delivered through the content areas in 100% English. To make content comprehensible and to enrich language development, we use ENL methodologies based on the SIOP model and total physical response (TPR). We also embed technology in our instruction. The content areas are ELA, Math, Social Studies, Science, and Art. We have also adopted Common Core aligned programs ; Expeditionary Learning, Core Knowledge Arts, Language Strands and scaffolding. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? We ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their native languages through native language assessments. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status a)SIFE student's are given individual instruction using phonics instruction and grammar. Teachers will work on developing skills in listening, reading, speaking, and writing. Number sense and basic math skills would also be part of the daily curriculum. We have a highly motivated instructional team that provides multiple data from a variety of sources that will assist with designing a targeted instructional program. b) When registered students are categorized as newcomers and parents choose our ENL program, the students receive their instruction from highly qualified teachers through total immersion with ESL support. These students become a part of a heterogeneous cohort based on their grade and then grouped according to varied proficiency levels. Kindergarten through Second grade teachers follow Core Knowledge Language reading curriculum. Grades 3-5 teachers follow Expeditionary Learning. Students receive additional exposure to the format and the content of the NYSESLAT. In each of the above core curriculum areas, differentiation of instruction is data driven to meet students at their zones of proximal development. c) In addition to the aforementioned instructional plan, ELLs receiving service for 4-6 years continue to receive ESL that is specifically geared to their needs and abilities based on the data. They continue to receive integrated or stand alone services with a focus on lessening test anxiety and mastering the NYSESLAT content. d) Our plan for continuing transitional support for ELLs reaching proficiency on the NYSESLAT is that students will continue to be heterogeneously clustered as an ELL cohort on each grade with licensed common branch teachers that have demonstrated best teaching practices as well as have a high rate of success with ELL students. The cohorts allow students to continue to receive uninterrupted access to all aforementioned school intervention programs in all core subject areas. Each classroom is equipped with either computers and/or a smart board to provide continued access to modern technology and provide other avenues of delivering instruction. Each cohort continues to receive testing modifications and integrated or stand alone services from the certified ESL teacher to support the rapid transition from their native language to standard English. These services are designed to meet the needs of the child’s proficiency level, grade and age for the up to two years after exiting ELL status as per CR 154.2. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? The ELLs/SWDs that are identified as in need of related services receive them as prescribed by their Individualized Educational Plan (IEP). Those students that do not have an IEP, are reviewed by the Response To Intervention team (RTI) where an educational action plan is developed based on age, grade, and proficiency levels. The action plans are reviewed every 6 weeks to determine its success and to create any necessary revisions. The school also has ICT self-contained classes on all grade levels. The Universal Design L team teaching, use of paraprofessionals, front loading vocabulary, Tier 1 and Tier 2,and scaffolding. In addition we will purchase the Language Power English as a second language to support all ENL students. 1  7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? The ELLs/SWDs that are identified as in need of related services receive them as prescribed by their Individualized Educational Plan (IEP). In order for students to attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment, they are grouped according to their needs and abilities. The SETSS and the ESL teacher collaborate with the Classroom teacher to ascertain the needs of the students to attain success. Flexible scheduling, service students with IEP's or without IEP's mixed together. The school provides instructional services by lesson planning with Universal Design. These lesson plans include total physical response, cooperative learning, team teaching, front loading vocabulary. To assist in these lessons we use various websites, smart board lessons and tablets to make the learning more interactive and hands on.. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. Instruction is delivered for ELLs in English Language Arts (ELA) via a balanced literacy model. Reader’s workshop, guided reading using differentiated instructional strategies, and writer’s workshop are included in this block. Our intervention services for K-5, include: Academic Intervention Service (AIS) – using a integrated or stand alone model skilled instructors provide extra instruction in ELA and mathematics to our most struggling ELL students. Wilson/Fundations – a one to one and small group reading program that targets struggling readers, used by AIS instructors to support reading deficiencies We select and implement proven research based interventions that are matched to students’ underlying needs. We collect formative baseline, mid-year, and end-of-year data to ensure that we are on track with meeting our long-term goals. Our interim assessments are administered, analyzed, and discussed every six weeks during our weekly collaborative learning meetings. We also provide extra help with language and grammar usage during our after school program, Response to Intervention schedule and our Academic Intervention Services (AIS). Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) Criteria for determining AIS services Type of Program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) English Language Arts (ELA): - ELL's who score Level 1 or 2 on the New York State English Language Arts exam - When students are referred by the School Implementation Team and are in need of academic support, These are the interventions: - Reading A-Z literacy program -Ready CCLS practice books -Core knowledge Language Arts Assessment & Remediation guides (Grades K-2) - Close reading strategies (Grades 3-5) - Reciprocal Teaching Protocol (Grades K -5) - Newsela.com. -Adjust their reading levels so that they all have access to the non - fiction text - Daily assessment of their reading comprehension through a short, four-question quiz. -Individual reports may be printed or sent to parents. - Small group - pull-out / push-in SETSS model - One-on-one support using Response to Intervention Strategies All done during the school day Mathematics : - ELL's who score Level 1 or 2 on the NYS Math exams 2  - When students are referred by the School Implementation Team and are in need of academic support, these are the interventions: -Think Central (online support system for Go Math program) -Go Math Tier I, II, and III interventions - EXEMPLARS performance-based assessments -Problem-solving strategies for solving word problems - Small group instruction - pull-out / push-in SETSS model - one-on-one support using Response to Intervention Strategies - All done during the school day Science : -ELL's Level 1 or 2 on New York State 4 th Grade Science Exam will receive supports are as follows: -Classroom assessment data -Teacher observation -Early childhood and upper grades use guided reading and small group activities that include open-ended questions based on the topics addressed in the New York City Scope and Sequence. - Hands-on activities addressing major standards and process skills addressed on the NYS 4 th Grade Science Exam - Close reading strategies for non - fiction text - Small group pullout/push in model with science cluster teacher All done during school day Social Studies ELL's Level 1 or 2 on New York State Exam in ELA will receive supports as follows: -Classroom assessment data -Teacher observation Early childhood and upper grades use guided reading and small group activities that include open-ended questions based on the topics addressed in the New York City Scope and Sequence for Social Studies - Hands-on activities addressing major standards and process skills addressed on the NYS ELA exam - Close reading strategies for non - fiction text - Small group pullout/push in model with classroom teacher during the school day 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? We provide extra help with language and grammar usage during our afterschool program. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? None. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. All students including ELL's are invited to participate in our After School Program Good Shepherds Compass Program and any enrichment activity that the school offers . Because our cohorts are integrated within the general education population, they are afforded equal access to all school programs, which include but are not limited to our academic curriculum, social activities, as well as extra - curricular activities. As previously stated, our ELLs receive extra support from our AIS providers, Good Shepherds Services – community based organizations that will provide weekly after-school extra curricula activities. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. The instructional materials used to support our ELLs and ELL subgroups are as follows: Reading-Expeditionary Learning-CKLA-Fundations/Wilson, Words Their Way, Fountas and Pinnel Level Literacy Intervention/Math-GO Math/Science-NYC Approved Standards Curriculum/ Social Studies-NYC Approved Standards Curriculum/ Technology-SmartBoards-Laptop Carts. Additional support materials include NYSESLAT skills practice books and CDs, audio/visual aids and center based activities to enrich language acquisition. All our units are looked at and modified through collaborative curriculum mapping. 3  13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Home Language Support is delivered in several ways. Our schools sends weekly parent notices in a second language, the curriculum that have been selected provide parents information about what their students are learning in their native language. Students have dictionaries and a library in their home language. Materials are translated by staff. Tests are translated when applicable in their home language. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. The schools ensures that all required services/ resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels through school based supports teams, grade teams and vertical team meetings on a regular basis to discuss student progress, achievement and needs. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? N/A 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). Newly enrolled ELL students are assisted before the beginning of the school year through Back to School orientation, Open House, Kindergarten and Pre-K orientation, Curriculum Night in September as well events offered by the PTA and the Parent Coordinator. We offer translation and translators. Staff is introduced during these meetings. . We also have a Parent Orientation. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? N/A 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? N/A Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? Throughout the 2017-2018 school year, there will be at least 3 professional developments held for teachers. The professional development for teachers will increase their understanding of implementation and strategies for the ELL population. Professional staff development for classroom teacher will offer knowledge of ESL methodologies and strategies. The professional learning sessions will aim to improve methodology on literacy, content-area, and language instruction. The ESL teacher will be exposed to ongoing professional development opportunities. Throughout the 2017-2018 school year, there will be at least 3 professional developments held for teachers, including all classroom Pre-K - 5 as well as out of classroom personnel (i.e. Math Support, Science Teacher, Literacy Coach, and SETTS). By utilizing professional resource materials including (Words Their Way, Word Study for Phonic, Vocabulary, and Spelling 4  Instruction by Donald Bear, English Language Learners: Day by Day K-6 by C. Celic, Connecting Content and Academic Language for English Learners and Struggling Students Grades 2-6 by R. Swinney and P. Velasco , Assessing English Language Learners; Bridges for Language Proficiency to Academic Achievement), I will gather information and gain insight into ways of helping others set-up an ELL environment that fosters learning across the content areas. The first professional development will be provided on September 25, 2017 and will provide a detailed look at ways to assess at-risk and ELL learners with a focus on running records. Two more professional developments will be given in the spring and will revisit needs of ELLs and help establish center areas in the teacher’s classroom. The following materials will be used: English Language Learners: Day by Day K-6 by C. Celic Connecting Content and Academic Language for English Learners and Struggling Students Grades 2-6 by R. Swinney and P. Velasco Assessing English Language Learners; Bridges for Language Proficiency to Academic Achievement Materials: The CALLA Handbook: Implementing the Cognitive Academic Language Learning Approach In-depth descriptions and examples for each component of the CALLA model: using content areas standards, developing academic language and teaching learning strategies. * A comprehensive analysis of the CALLA instructional sequence to help teachers plan and differentiate instruction * Standardized test preparation and authentic, performance-based assessments. Mathematics Institute for Secondary Teachers of ELLs Dates: October 23, November 20 and December 18 Developing Academic Language for English Language Learners (ELLs) in Mathematics Institute (Elementary) Dates: Two-day institute in December 18, 2017 and January 29, 2018 Leadership Institute in Upper Elementary Mathematics for Teachers of English Language Learners (ELLs) Dates: Three-day institute in November 9, 2017; December 8, 2017 and January 11, 2017. Implementation of New CR Part 154 to Ensure High Quality Education for English Language Learners Date: Tuesday, November 3, 2017 OR Wednesday, November 17,2017 (One session per day) Title III AMAO Estimation Tool Brooklyn North Introduction to English Language Learners with Special Needs– : TBD Teachers receive ongoing professional development that is provided by various opportunities by the Office for English Language Learners and through the ENL teacher.The ELL teacher will attend various Professional Developments and turn key the following topics: Developing Academic Language for English Language Learners (ELLs) in Mathematics Institute. Leadership Institute in Upper Elementary Mathematics for Teachers of English Language Learners (ELLs) 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. We have restructured the way that we design our professional development so that it best meets the needs of our teachers and our population of ELLs. We use ENL methodologies and incorporate the SIOP model. The social worker and guidance counselors support students through Respect for All. Work with your guidance counselor for students to place in middle school bilingual and ENL program. The guidance counselor will work with ENL teacher to assist Ell's and their parents to ensure that he transition to middle school will have a comprehensive program for Ell's. As Part 154 weekly meetings on Mondays supports ELLs on agenda. As we move forward the structure will incorporate the Chancellor's Conference that occur before the Study group. Start of school and twice during the school year since it will afford us the opportunity to engage non-certified staff in the 7.5 hours of ELL training. The days before school will be an 1.5 hour overview of ELL compliance, programming, and instructional delivery. The remaining 6 hours will be split between the two days of mandated Chancellor's PD that occur during the school year and the focus will be based on summative and formative data. We also have weekly Monday professional developments where support for Ell's are discussed and in addition to that we have District 14/Brooklyn North professional development. To make certain that all staff received the minimum number of hours, we keep accurate attendance logs/sheets. 5  Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? The school will host various meetings throughout the school year. Our school will provide a Spring conference to parents of ELL's and collaborate with District 14 Parent ELL meeting. During these meeting ELL parents will be invited in to join and discuss the progress of students. In addition to report cards, the school will also be providing the families with progress reports in January. The meetings and the progress reports will be translated to ensure that family’s needs are met. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Our parents, especially those of our ELL population, are vital component to our students’ success; therefore, we have designed activities to meet their needs based on informal and formal conversations conducted by various members of the administration and the parent coordinator as well as parent surveys distributed and collected by the School Leadership Team (SLT). The programs include but are not limited to the following: Monthly Parent Workshops are conducted to enhance parenting and academic skills knowledge, as well as health issues. NYC School Account training so parents may have 24 hour access to their child’s data. To increase attendance at our meetings we use a translator that allow our parents that speak other languages to participate. There will be at least 3 one hour workshops for parents to come to the school and learn techniques to help their children. These workshops will be held to assist parents in supporting their ELLs at home. Various techniques will be demonstrated to parents to show them how to help their children learn English when they themselves do not speak English. As a certified ENL teacher who is fluent in Spanish and English, the workshops will allow the native Spanish speakers to interact and participate in a meaningful way. The workshop notices will be translated to accommodate the native language at home (French, Spanish, Arabic). The translation services will be provided by parent volunteers and several translating resources. The Stockton School will support parents and families of ELL students by: • providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; • providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; • fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; • providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; • sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; (i.e. Golden Ticket is distributed every Tuesday to parents. Coffee with the Principal is held every month for parents) • providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; The Parent Coordinator, the ENL teacher, and the Assistant Principals will be active participants in the workshop. The goal is for parents to interact with various members of the school community. Topics for Workshops: Common Core and How It Relates to English Language Learners Reading With Your Child and the Benefits Literacy Game Night The Parent Coordinators role in regard to ELL parents is the following • Increase ELL parent involvement in the school by working closely with all school, community members, parents, teachers and all school community organizations. 6  • Serves as a facilitator for ELL parent and school community concerns. • Conducts outreach to engage ELL parents in their children’s education. • Convenes regular ELL parent meetings and events around topics of key concerns to parents. • Serves as a school liaison to Central parent and Regional parent support Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. N/A 7 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, James Brown, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 8  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: The Richard Stockton School School DBN: 14K297 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) James E. Brown Title Principal Galia Espinal Assistant Principal Angelica Irizarry Parent Coordinator Pending ENL/Bilingual Teacher Caridad Torres Parent Charles Rabbach Teacher/Subject Area x x x Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach Jessica Cashman School Counselor Alicja Winnicki Sylvia Gimenes x x x Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Sylvia Gimenes Other x Other x Other x Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 8/3/17 8/3/17 8/3/17 8/3/17 8/3/17 8/3/17 8/3/17 8/3/17 8/3/17 8/3/17 8/3/17 8/3/17 9  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 14K297 School Name: PS 297 Superintendent: Alicja Winnick The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this Galia Espinal Assistant Principal conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. The data and methodologies used are; analyzing the attendance from various sources such as, Parent/Teacher Conferences, open house, parent workshops, Home Language Surveys of new admits, parent choice selection forms and parent needs surveys conducted by the School Leadership Team. This information has shown that the majority of our parents speak one of three languages. We use staff and parent volunteers’ translators and interpreters, and DOE translation options to ensure that our parents are provided with appropriate and timely information in a language that they comprehend. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. 0  Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral 30 % 115 parents prefer communication written in Spanish. 115 prefer communication orally. 30% The major findings of our school's written translation and oral interpretation needs are that the majority of our parents speak English, Spanish, smaller populations speak Urdu, and Bengali. The findings were reported to the school community during an open house orientation, parent/teacher conference welcome sessions, and faculty conferences. We also have at least three ESL parent workshops that explain various types of topics are covered to ensure the success of the ELL population. In addition the Parent Handbook and Report Cards are translated. 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency How do you Distributed to Families Parent Teacher Conferences both afternoon and evening to take place in September 2017, (curriculum night) , November 2017 (Formal), March 2018 (Formal), and May 2018, (learning carnival). The documents that are translated are placed in the student folders (Golden Tickets) each week, Coffee with the Principal meetings-per grade level, ESL parent letters, weekly notices, and monthly school events calendars. Welcome Letters -9/2017 Curriculum Night letters (9/2017) plan to translate? Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. All letters that are distributed are done on a timely manner. Support staff translates all correspondence. 1  Parent Teacher Conferences ( 11/2017) Students folders are distributed with letters as needed, (9/2017 - 6/2018) Calendars are distributed on a monthly basis. Parents and staff are given notices of all events. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school Parent Teacher Conferences both afternoon and evening will take place in September (2017), (curriculum night) November 2017, (Formal), November 2017, (Family Pot-luck) March 2018, (Formal), and May( 2018,earning Carnival). There are on - going face to face meetings on Tuesday during parent outreach hours, monthly coffee with the principal, and several informational sessions are held during the school year. These meetings are on - going and staff is available for interpretation. plan to provide interpretation service(s)? Staff is available during these sessions to support parents and provide information in Spanish. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure2  Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) We will hand out the Bill of Parents Rights during all school conferences which are made available in various languages to accommodate our family’s needs. We also will have our guidance team reach out to the parents that are entitled to LTI services to explain their rights. If the family needs immediate translation the school secretary will notify the parent coordinator of this need and the parent coordinator will find an appropriate staff member to translate for the visitor. The staff member/translator will meet the visitor at the office and assist him/her with communicating with the appropriate parties. Signs are posted in the main foyer as well as in the parent coordinator's office that advertise interpretation services available in several languages. Furthermore, the parent coordinator has a list of staff members who speak these languages and will contact the staff members as needed for assistance. When a parent enrolls a child in our school and indicates that English is not the parent's primary language, the enrollment packet, including the video, is given in the parent's native language whenever possible. If the written information is not available in the parent's native language, a staff member who can orally interpret the information assists in explaining and translating the documentation to the parent. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? The administration host on - going events that are grade specific and parents will be able to give their feedback. During parent out reach time teachers will meet with families regularly which will provide instant feedback. Parents participate in the Annual School Survey. 3 
