 18K563 School Name: IT TAKES A VILLAGE ACADEMY Principal: SYBIL GIRARD 2018-19 CEP-CS 1  Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC)   School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information It Takes A Village Academy 18K563 18K563 9-12 School Number (DBN): 5800 Tilden Avenue , 1 st floor, Brooklyn , NY 11203 718-629-2307 718-629-6162 Phone Number: Fax: Sybil Girard sgirard2@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Ms.Sybil Girard Email Address: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: Ms. Kathy Lafontant Ms. Nicole Hope and Ms. Sharon Van Cooten Ms. Petra Johnson ( parent) SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Oscar Thomas Mathew Van Cooten JalenBrown Ms. Christina Neubrand Geographical District: 18 Superintendent’s Office Address: District Information Mr. Michael Prayor Superintendent: 1830 Shore Blvd RM F11 Brooklyn, NY 11235 mprayor@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718- 368-8515 Phone Number: 718- 368 -8517 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC)   South Brooklyn Field Support Center FSC: Mauriciere Degovia Executive Director: 415 89th St. , Brooklyn, 11209 and 4390 Flatlands Ave. , Brooklyn , 11234 Executive Director’s Office Address: mdegovi@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 718-223-5240 Phone Number: 718-223-5243 Fax:   Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Sybil Girard Kathy Lafontant Nicole Hope Deborah Williams Sharon Van Cooten Mathew Van Cooten JalenBrown *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Christina Neubrand CBO Representative, if applicable Petra Johnson Oscar Thomas Member/ Parent Member/ Parent   Name Deborah Raymond Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Member/Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Member/ teacher Member/teacher Member/ teacher Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/   Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with   the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement   Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? It Takes a Village Academy’s (ITAVA) mission: To prepare students with the advanced skills, knowledge, and confidence to become positive and responsible global citizens by cultivating in them ITAVA’s four core values - COMMUNICATION, CHARACTER, CRITICAL THINKING, and CIVIC RESPONSIBILITY.   2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. Mission statement: "It Takes A Village Academy’s (ITAVA) mission is "to prepare students with the advanced skills, knowledge, and confidence to become positive and responsible global citizens by cultivating in them ITAVA’s four core values - COMMUNICATION, CHARACTER, CRITICAL THINKING, and CIVIC RESPONSIBILITY. ". It Takes A Village Academy opened its doors at Samuel J Tilden Educational Campus in 2007. It is located at the heart of the East Flatbush community. It is a growing school with an ongoing enrollment throughout the school year. It Takes a Village Academy High School has a diversified population. It is one of the most diverse high school in District 18. ITAVA has a current enrollment of 722 students, 17% of which are students with disabilities (SWD) and 25% who are ENL (English as a New Language). Our ENL students are of diverse backgrounds / countries and speak a variety of languages, including French, Haitian Creole, Arabic, and Spanish. According to the ATS reports, State and City Data: - 21% of our students are over-aged and under credited - 17% are students with special needs - 25 % are ENLs - Black and Hispanic males make up 57% of our school’s population - Black and Hispanic females make 43% of our school’s population In keeping with our three core values — communication, character and critical thinking — all students become proficient in a foreign language, participate in an Advisory group that is focused on character development, Restorative Practices, Mindset shift, College Access or community building depending on their Academy. Students participate in daily meaningful discussions and projects that engage their critical thinking and problem-solving skills. ITAVA graduated its first cohort in 2011. Graduation rate was 90.7%. Since 2011, ITAVA’s graduation has been stable between 87%-93%. Our graduation rate for 2017 - 2018 was 91%. 90% of ITAVA students graduate with college credits (6-30 credits) and enroll in colleges. Tolerance, mutual respect and understanding are the cornerstones of the ITAVA community as students celebrate the richness of the school’s ethnic diversity on a daily basis. With approximately 722 students, ITAVA is not considered a small school for New York City. We offer students real world, authentic and rigorous experiences in the classroom, extensive course electives, a large number of Advanced Placement courses as well as many extracurricular opportunities. Our goal at ITAVA is to support improved attendance and scholarship as well as to address the needs of all students as we prepare them for the future. We are extremely proud of the consistent improvement in our student data. We have seen a steady increase in our graduation data each year. Our credit accumulation data reveals that our students outperform our peer group schools by 5% to over 23%, depending on the category and grade level, but we are still looking to improve our present data, especially in the area of our lowest third population. This is done through our extensive morning, afternoon and Saturday Enrichment programs. ITAVA Students have an opportunity to enroll in college courses and can earn up to 24 college credits. This is done through our partnerships with City University of New York, New York University, Monroe College, Berkley college, St. Francis College, Medgar Evers, Kingsborough Community College and Long Island University . 9th grade ITAVA students can enroll in the LIU STEP program, then continues with the program throughout the 4 years of high school, earning college credits each year. Through our partnership with Monroe College students have an opportunity to enroll in the Law Program. BRAMSONORT offers support with Business and Medical Programs. Our students also have an opportunity to earn credits in Math, English and Science through Medgar Evers College. These college courses are offered and are taught by teachers who are trained to teach these college courses. Through our partnership with Kingsborough Community College students can earn credits in 0  Computer Science, Marine Biology, Bio-Technology and Mass Communication. NYU PolyTech offers Robotics three times a week. The Robotics Program started in 2008-2009. The team became # 3 team in Robotics, FTC among new schools in 2009-2010 in New York City . The ITAVA team was # 1 school in Robotics, FTC - 2010-2011 in New York City . The Robotics team participated in US National Competitions. Then, the team was a finalist in the Robotics Competitions, FTC for five consecutive years beginning in in 2011-2012. The team also received special FTC Awards for four consecutive years from 2013 -2014 (QT PTC Inspiration Award, QT PTC Recognition of Science and Technology, and QT PTC Design Awards). In 2014 -2015 and 2015-2016 the team was awarded Special FTC Award for QT PTC Design, again. Our school offers work study program in Health Professions and IT. We have built partnerships with Inter-generational work study program (volunteer program) and a work-based learning program through DOE that pays students for internships. Students who later major in Health professions benefit from these experiences. Other hands-on work-study experiences are offered by our Technology teacher who teaches students how to rebuild computers, create operational networking and maintain the school technology in a good working condition. We have seen an increase in our attendance rate, and we have been able to obtain over the 91.7% full year percentage including LTA’s . We will continue to work on our goal to achieve a 92+% attendance for the year. Even with the improvement in our school wide data, one of the areas of weakness is our College Readiness index. We have made some progress, with increase in comparison to previous years, but it is still not at an acceptable rate. This is an area that we will continue to work collaboratively to improve. As a school community, we believe that the secret to our success is a structural and instructional focus. First, the personalized settings of our Academies (the school is divided into four Academies with a lead teacher who runs the Academy) allows students to learn in an environment that offers a course of study that is of interest to them, provides the student with the same guidance counselor for the four years of high school and allows the dedicated staff to really get to know everything about their students. As the result, every student has a mentor who monitors their academic and social progress. Secondly, through our common planning times, teachers meet three times a week to discuss student work, student data and student outcomes during our focused inquiry work and professional developments. The findings of our inquiry work inform our curriculum development, professional development and instructional practices. Our collaborative teacher teams work together to develop strategies, interventions and practices that not only meet the skill needs of the students but is also lessons that are rigorous, fun and authentic. The ITAVA community believes strongly in an open-door policy for our families and is continuously creating programs, workshops and activities to increase our family engagement. As a result, we have built strong relations with our parents/families and hope to increase the number of families that participate in our monthly activities. Our on-line grade book allows parents to follow their child’s progress on Pupil Path, both academically as well as their attendance. We will continue to deepen our instruction and have an open door policy for parents and visitors and provide opportunities for parents/guardians to participate in their child's high school experience. School Performance ( NYC School Progress Report) This School’s Performance in 2016-2017 What % of Students… Are on Track after Ninth Grade? 98% Graduate in Four Years? 89.75% Graduate in Six Years? 92% Enroll in College or Career Programs after Graduation? 90.5% 1  2015-2016 2014 - 2015 2013-2014 2012-2013 2011-2012 2010-2011 98% 98% 97% 92.6% 92.9% 95.6% 88.9% 92.4% 91% 89.3% 85.9% 90.7% 91% 91% 93% 90% 90% 90% 92.5% Not Reported 89% 87.9% Not Reported 89.1% 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. Special Population: We have some ENL students who are over-aged and under-credited, as a result of interrupted education in their country or due to the challenges of learning a new language. Specific Needs: 1. Programs to increase credit accumulation - such as online courses through programs such as APEX 2. An extensive Summer School Program - where students can earn up to 3 credits 3. Morning, after school and Saturday ESL Program to build language and reading skills 4. Programs such as Achieve 3000 to assist ENL students in writing and reading skills 5. Regents Prep - assistance in preparing for Regents (especially in ELA and Social Studies) Special Population: Students in the Lowest Third   ENL Students Specific Needs: 1. Credit accumulation - programs to increase credit accumulation (APEX) 2. An extensive Summer School Program - where students earn up to 3 credits 3. Regents Prep- after school and Saturday Regents Prep classes 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. Students achievements: The school made the most progress in graduating students who are college and career ready. Focus: Improving School Culture and Trust. 2  3  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 18K563 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 09,10,11,12 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 730 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 4 4 9 25 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 23 13 3 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 73.0% % Attendance Rate 69.0% % Reduced Lunch 17.7% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) 1.5% 7.0% 1.4% % Black or African American % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 0.79 0% 13% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation 92% 92% 89.2% 18.1% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A NO Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A YES No N/A 119 112 36 91.1% 3.4% 14.7% 87.3% 2.2% 2.2% 4 3% 5.9 N/A N/A 94% 91% 93.2% 15% N/A No No N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A NO N/A N/A N/A NO NO N/A N/A N/A NO YES N/A N/A N/A YES 4  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. ITAVA has consistent improvement in student data such as attendance, credit accumulation, Regents data and graduation data. As a school community we examine feedback from the School Quality Guide and the College Readiness Index from the Framework for Great Schools to set goals for ourselves as well as celebrate our successes. After careful analysis of our June 2018 Regents data, while there were a few increases from the previous year, we realized that we need to focus on increasing our Algebra Regents pass rate: Algebra 1: 40%, Geometry: 53%, Algebra II: 35%, Living Environment: 49%, Earth Science: 65%, Chemistry: 22%, Physics: 41%, Global: 55%, US History: 78% and English: 67%. Analysis of MOTP ratings of teachers indicate that the lowest ratings were in Domain 3. The overall teacher ratings for the Components: 3B - 2.71, 3C - 2.87 and 3D - 2.84. Strengths: 1. Attendance rate of 90% 2. Graduation rate of 91% 3. Collaborative Teacher Teams using an Inquiry Cycle to align lessons with Common Core Standards to increase student learning & achievement 4. Weekly Focused and differentiated Professional Development Cycles Priority Needs:  Rigorous Instruction in all classes     Increasing Regents rates in Algebra 1 Increase credit accumulation for students who are in the Lowest Third Improve Teacher ratings in 3B of the Danielson Rubric Implement a school-wide suggested template for lesson plan and unit plan 5  Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, through rigorous classroom activities; as measured by HESS' Cognitive Rigor Matrix; there will be an increase of 2% of students receiving a passing grade of 65 or higher on the Algebra 1 Regents exams as measured by the ATS REDS report. 6  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs,  professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). 1 . Professional Development Series that will focus on instructional strategies to increase rigor. Specific focus will be on increasing the level of rigorous thinking as measured by HESS' Cognitive Rigor Matrix / Webb's depth of knowledge across all content areas. Staff will conduct an item analysis of the June 2018 Regents in Algebra 1. Then complete the following: - Department Leaders September 2018 - June 2019 - Principal - Teachers - Paraprofessionals - Assistant Principals - Monthly Professional Development Series - Instructional Coaches -create department Power Standards -identify skills needed to achieve Power Standards -write action plans with instructional strategies -Create Department Power Standards Skills Rubrics -Teachers plan rigorous lessons during weekly meetings -Teachers conduct Lesson Plan studies (looking for rigor) during departmental meetings -Teachers conduct weekly inter-visitations to analyze: rigorous instruction, Power Standards, skills and effective use of the Skills-based Rubrics -Teachers facilitate their students to write goals that are aligned to the Power Standards -Teachers create common assessments (midterms & finals) that are aligned to the Regents and Power Standards - Students - Item Analysis will be conducted after each Regents exams in January and June - PD Committee - Master Teacher - Special Education Coordinator - Lesson plan studies will be conducted weekly during Departmental meetings - Common assessments done once per semester 7  -Teachers analyze data of midterms and finals and look for trends - Strategies to address student subgroups include but not limited to: sentence and question starters, graphic organizers, various resources and additional materials such as laptops, manipulative, dictionaries, calculators, samples / examples of rigorous work products, various grouping strategies, ect. 2. Monday Professional Development sessions that will familiarize teachers with the Danielson Rubric with an emphasis on the elements of highly effective in each component. Professional development will then be differentiated for all teachers base on individual ratings. -Teachers - Paraprofessionals Every Monday during scheduled PD during September 2018 - June 2019 - Administration -Instructional Coaches - PD Committee - Master Teacher - Teacher Leaders 3. During Department and Academy meetings, teachers will discuss and analyze students' performance and instructional strategies that affect rigor in Algebra 1. Teacher teams will focus on the level of the task as aligned to Webb's depth of knowledge. Students will be asked to complete level 3 and 4 tasks throughout the year. - Department Leaders - Academy Leaders - Classroom Teachers September 2018 - June 2019 during weekly meetings - Assistant Principals - Master Teacher - Department Leaders - Academy Leaders - Strategies for different student subgroups include but are not limited to: - small groups instruction, student-led activities, hands-on /experiential learning, blended learning, problem-based questions with real world applications, ect 4. Support and Incentives to Students:  Provide after-school and Saturday Regents tutoring classes.  Provide support to students in their classes such as questions stems, sentence starters and discussion protocols  Additional support software / programs for students - Achieve 3000, APEX Online Learning, ect.  Provide incentives to students based on  achievement/improvement of attendance and academic progress. Strategies for different student subgroups include but are not limited to: - extra computer lab time available before, after school and during Saturday school - Classroom Teachers - Students September 2018 - June 2019 - daily during classes and weekly during Saturday Academy - Administration - Guidance Counselors - Master Teacher -Department Leaders Teachers 8  5. Implementation of online instructional and academic resources such as study.com, Brain pop, Khan Academy, eduware: Wizard testmaker, ect. - Students - Parents September 2018 - June 2019 - weekly Strategies for different student subgroups include but are not limited to: - access for students to use softwares at home, during their lunch time, before, after school and during Saturday Academy. 6. All teachers will be trained on Skedula, STARS Classroom, SESIS, Google Docs and Google Domain to improve teacher academic feedback and communication with students and parents. - Teachers - Paraprofessionals 7. Parents will be invited into classroom once per month during the monthly 'Breakfast with the Principal'. Parents will be given a copy of the Cognitive Rigor Matrix / Webb's Depth of Knowledge to assist in understanding the types of level 3 and 4 tasks students will be asked to complete across the curriculum. Parents will also be given access to Skedula so they can track their child's progress on a daily basis. Parents will be given progress reports 3 times each semester. - Parents - Students 8. Through partnerships with colleges such as: Medgar Evers College, LIU, Kingsborough Community College, Monroe College and Berkely College, we will offer a variety of college classes (both on and off campus) where students will have the opportunity to earn up to college credits. - Students September 2018 - October 2018 - during weekly Staff PD and weekly departmental meetings September 2018 - June 2019 - monthly Breakfast with the Principal - daily access to Skedula September 2018 - June 2019 - each semester 9. Data - folios will be created for each individual student and made accessible for all teachers to use during planning and End of Year Academic Exhibitions. - Administration - Teachers September 2018 - June 2019 -Administration -Master Teachers -Teacher Leaders -Parent Coordinator - Administration - Guidance Counselors - Master Teacher - Teacher Leaders - Teachers - Principal -Assistant Principals - Guidance Counselors - Master Teacher - Classroom Teachers - Parent Coordinator -Assistant Principals - Guidance Counselors - Department Leaders - Teachers - Administration - Master Teacher 9  Strategies for different student subgroups include but are not limited to: - support provided by paraprofessionals, Advisory teachers, Academy teachers and student leaders. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement - Students - each semester - Department Leaders How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Parents will be given access to Skedula so they can monitor their child's work on a daily basis. Workshops will be held for parents on the use of Skedula and supports they can provide their children at home in preparation for midterms, finals and Regents exams. ITAVA will have an open-door policy where families can visit and participate in school activities (both academic and non- academic). Workshops will be held to explain the cognitive rigor matrix to parents then they will be invited into classrooms to look for evidence of rigorous instruction. Through PTA meetings and workshops, we will review and explain the expectations and ways that parents can assist their child with their class work at home, homework and preparations for assessments and Regents. This work will take place during monthly PTA meetings, monthly Breakfast with the Principal meetings and throughout the school year (September 2018 - June 2019). Key personnel responsible will be the Parent Coordinator, Guidance Counselors, coordinator of student activities and the Principal's cabinet. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 1. Math Instructional Coach, from the National Training Network, will assist teachers in ensuring that all lessons are rigorous and aligned to the Common Core State Standards. The coach will also collaborate with the Master Teacher and Administration to plan weekly Professional Development for teachers and Paraprofessionals. The instructional coach will also provide one-on-one coaching to teachers in which teachers will receive feedback on rigorous instructional strategies. 2. The PD Committee, which comprises of teachers, the master teacher and administration, will collaborate, plan and lead PD sessions once per week during Monday Professional Development that will focus on a specific strategies and techniques to drive our instructional focus and increase rigorous instruction in the classroom. This will include data analysis and implementation of the power standards, department marking period skills and instructional strategies. 3. Content specific teachers will provide after school and Saturday Regents prep and tutoring to focus on increasing student skills with common core aligned tasks in preparation for Regents exams. 4. Per session will be provided for family engagement nights, outside professional development, and curriculum design. 5. Per Session will be provided for teachers to provide additional support to students during after school and Saturday supplemental skill building instruction. 0  6. Special Education teachers and ENL teachers will conduct trainings for classroom teachers so that scaffolding can be provided for special education students and ELL students. 7. Per session will be provided to ESL teachers to provide additional support and interventions to ENL students during before, after school and Saturday classes. 8. Funds will be used to purchase software and programs that will assist teachers and students to increase rigor, Regents scores and credit accumulation- such as Achieve 3000, APEX, ect. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A X C4E X 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG X PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019 there will be 1% increase of students receiving a passing grade of 65 or higher on the Algebra 1 Regents exams as measured by the ATS REDS report after the January 2019 Algebra 1 Regents and Final exams that are aligned to the Regents. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) June 2019 Regents data in Algebra 1 Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 1  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? After a close analysis of the following: - NYC surveys - Framework for Great Schools report - Attendance reports - Dean's referrals - Suspension reports - OORS (Online Occurence Reporting System)Reports We observed that during the 2017 - 2018 school year, there were 47 Level 3 incidents, 51 Level 4 incidents and a total of 126 incidents. As a school we need to continue to work on improving our school culture which would impact data such as classroom behavior, peer interactions, suspensions and trust. Strengths: ● Social-emotional student support ● Full time Social Worker ● Personal attention and support ● Advisories that are based on Restorative Practices ● Guidance services - one Guidance Counselor assigned to each grade level Priority Needs: ● Interventions to decrease student-to-student conflicts 2  ● Increase civil accountability for students ● Decrease the number of Dean's referrals ● Decrease the number of suspensions ● Increase student involvement in school activities ● Increase and build School Morale ● Trust among staff members, staff-students and staff-parents/families ● Positive Peer Interactions (Peer Mediation) ● Attendance interventions to increase whole school monthly attendance ● Supportive interventions for students who fall in the 70% - 79% attendance range Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019 through restorative justice practices, peer mediation and increased student voice there will be a 2% decrease in suspensions as measured by OORS (Online Occurence Reporting System) and SOHO (Suspensions and Office of Hearings Online) reports. 3  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs,  professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). 1. All staff members will be trained in Restorative Practices which will be used to address student-student and student-staff conflicts that may arise. In addition, Restorative circles will be used as a professional development strategies to foster empathy between staff and students. Administration -Deans September 2018 - June 2019 - Principal -Assistant Principals -Teachers - Paras - monthly -Morning Side Coach - Deans -School Aides 2. The Restorative Practices Care Team will facilitate daily -weekly restorative circles where students will discuss biases and other issues that arise among themselves and in the school community. - Students - Teachers Strategies for different student subgroups include but are not limited to: - informal conversations with students by their Advisory teachers, trusting activities with students and their teachers, paraprofessionals, Guidance Counselors, ect 3. Throughout the school year professional development will be offered to teachers on effective classroom management strategies. This will be in the form of teachers presenting best practices, formal professional development as well as through kid-talk protocols. During our weekly Learning Rounds positive classroom management strategies will be highlighted and shared with other teachers. This data will be tabulated and reviewed quarterly. - Classroom Teachers September 2018 - June 2019 - daily and weekly - Assistant Principals - Guidance Counselors - Social Worker - Restorative Practices Care Team - Morning Side Coach - Deans - Principal -Assistant Principals - Master Teacher - Teacher Leaders - Teachers - Deans -Weekly Professional Developments September 2018 - June 2019 - Weekly Learning Rounds 4  4. The creation of a Peer Mediation Center that will be facilitated by a teacher who is trained in Peer Mediation strategies. The center will be open at least 2 periods per day, where students will be trained by the teacher to hear and resolve student conflicts before they escalate. Teachers, deans, guidance counselors, administrators and students will refer students to the Peer Mediation Center where they will be coached in resolving conflicts. In addition, the number of hallway monitors will be increased to ensure a safe learning environment at all times. We will also have a bell system to help in the management of students in and out of the different periods in a more timely fashion, thus a more effective way to monitor the halls. Strategies for different student subgroups include but are not limited to: - a referral system for various student subgroups, de-escalation strategies used by staff when students are in crisis, referral to counseling by the Social worker, ect. 5. The Student council / government will hold monthly town hall meetings (9th & 10th and 11th & 12th grades) to address any issues raised by the student body, school activities and school initiatives. Possible solutions will be proposed - Town hall notes and proposals will be presented to the Principal’s cabinet for further consideration. - students October 2018 - June 2019 September 2018 - June 2019 Daily and weekly sessions - Assistant Principals - Guidance Counselors - Social Worker - deans - teachers - students -school aides - students September 2018 - June 2019 - Principal - Assistant Principals - Teachers - monthly - Students Strategies for different student subgroups include but are not limited to: - opportunities for students to submit topics, questions or areas of concerns before the meeting, student representatives for each grade level. 6. The Coordinator of Student Activities (COSA) will work collaboratively with the students through the Student Government to plan a school calendar of monthly activities to increase students' morale, participation and school pride. In addition, the COSA will facilitate the execution of these activities and ensure participation and recognition of all students. - students 7. Through our partnership with Community School, 21st Century and ESVD grant, a variety of after school clubs and enrichment activities will be available to students where they will be engaged in relevant projects to contribute to the school community. Some of these clubs include dance, music, murals, public speaking, photography, social media, - students September 2018 - June 2019 - monthly September 2018 - June 2019 - Assistant Principals - COSA - Pupil Accounting Secretary - Teachers - Assistant Principals -Community School Director - Teachers 5  event planning, coding, culinary, engineering, health professions, ect. The Community School Director will work with students and staff to ensure the success of these programs. 8. An Attendance Team comprising of administrators, teachers, guidance counselors, attendance teacher, pupil accounting secretary, community school director and parent coordinator will meet weekly to analyze attendance data, create and execute action plans and interventions for continuous attendance outreach. - weekly - students with less than 90% attendance weekly from September 2018 - June 2019 9. Attendance incentives will be given to students monthly: Perfect attendance, most improved attendance, punctuality awards, ect - Students 10. Grade-level Advisories where the curriculum is specific to that grade level and ranges from: restorative practices, Brainology, College Readiness, Conflict Resolution, Peer Mentoring, ect. - students Strategies for different student subgroups include but are not limited to: activities that are specific to the needs of individual students, regarding college access, conflict resolution, student-led activities and Restorative Justice circles, ect. - students - parents 11. The creation of an ITAVA College Office with a College Advisor who is able to guide and assist students in the post-secondary plans. The college office will utilize various programs and organizations such as 'One Goal' to empower students in making decisions and navigating the path towards a successful college or career journey upon graduation. Teachers who have indicated an interest in working with the college office will be members of the College Committee and will assist students with college and financial aid applications. Strategies for different student subgroups include but are not limited to: - teachers, paraprofessionals and parent coordinators assisting students with the various steps in the monthly from September 2018 - June 2019 Advisories are held on the 2/3 split - either 2 times a week or 3times a week then vice versa the following semester September 2018 - June 2019 September 2018 - June 2019 - daily and weekly - Assistant Principals - Guidance Counselors -Attendance Teacher - Parent Coordinator - Assistant Principals - Guidance Counselors - Pupil Accounting Secretary - Teachers - Assistant Principals - Teachers -Administration - Guidance Counselors - College Advisor - College Committee 6  college application process, workshops and information sessions for students and parents who need additional assistance. 12. Students are recognized for their academic and conduct achievements after each marking period. Students will receive awards such as Principal's List, Honor Roll, Academic Hall of Fame, Student-of-the-Month, Academy Stars, ect. - students Each marking period: September 2018 - June 2019 13. In an effort to build school spirit and improve relationships between students and staff, we will plan more events like “Battle of Academies”, friendly staff vs students competitions that will increase opportunities for staff- students to interact in a non-academic setting. - students - staff September 2018 - June 2019 - Assistant Principals -Guidance Counselors - Academy Leaders - Teachers -Administration -Cabinet -COSA 14. Create a council made up of representatives from each grade level within the Student Government to inform/discuss ways in which the student body would suggest to make instruction more exciting and ways to build school pride and morale. - students - once per semester -Student Government September 2018 - June 2019 -Teachers -Administration -Cabinet -COSA - monthly meetings -Student Government -Teachers - Parent coordinator - Principal - Assistant Principals 15. Recognize teachers and staff for accomplishments in their attendance and professional contributions to the school community, such as: Staff monthly perfect attendance, Teacher-of-the-month and Support-Staff-of-the-month, ect. -teachers -paraprofessionals - all staff September 2018 - June 2019 - monthly 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Parents will be informed about student attendance daily through our phone messaging system, Remind APP, as well as Skedula. Parents will be informed about the student government during the Fall back to school night and 7  throughout the year. Letters will be mailed home to explain the structure of the student government. Each month at PTA / SLT meetings the student government representatives will update parents on their progress. The personnel responsible for this task will be the Principal's cabinet, the coordinator of student activities and the parent coordinator. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 1. Attendance Team training after school in the Fall 2018 2. Peer-mediation and conflict resolution training and workshops 3. Professional Development for teachers on effectively executing restorative circles and peer mediation strategies in the Fall 2018 4. Classroom management training and workshops by Coaches 5. Per Session for teachers in the after school program 6. Comp time position for teacher who will facilitate the Peer Mediation center and the College Advisor 7. Purchasing of awards and incentives for students Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E X X Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA Title II, Part A SIG X PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, there will be 1% decrease in suspensions as measured by OORS (Online Occurence Reporting System) and SOHO (Suspensions and Office of Hearings Online) reports. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Comparing OORS reports of 2017-2018 to that of 2018-2019 Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 8  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. As a cabinet we reviewed the data from the NYC School Quality Guide for the past school year, school scholarship reports, and student transcripts. We also reviewed our data regarding observations through the advance system, as well as staff feedback to professional development sessions and informal conversations from the end of year conferences. We also examined feedback from our last Principal performance observations which state specifically to continue to support teachers' planning of instructional supports for individualized students to ensure that they have access and entry points to rigorous work. Our strengths are as follows: ● Strong teacher teams ● Content specialists ● Graduation rate - 91% ● Peer feedback ● Department Teams that meet weekly with a focused agenda and work products ● Academy Teams (Grade Teams) that meet biweekly and they each have Academy Goals for their students ● Strong after-school and Saturday School program ● An Extended Day program which helps students earn more credits per semester Priority Needs: ● Allotted time for co-planning instruction. ● Increased performance in student to student interaction and learning. ● Increased critical thinking skills though activities that are at least A Webb's Depth of Knowledge level 3 or 4 9  ● Increase the Regents completion rate for ENL students in Cohort U ● Expand inter-visitations among teachers ● Study and implement instructional strategies that will improve rigor or ratings in Domain 3 Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, through teacher collaborative team work, ENL students will make progress toward graduation as evidence by a 2% overall increase in graduation rate as measured by the New York City School Quality Guide. 0  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? 1. Teachers will work collaboratively in teams to analyze student assessment data to identify standards, content and skill needs. Once identified, teacher teams will monitor learning progressions through the use of established protocols. - All Teachers September 2018 - June 2019 - Principal - Assistant Principals - weekly during departmental meetings - Master Teacher - Teacher Leaders 2. The professional development committee will develop and facilitate professional learning sessions that provide teacher support with the use of data driven instruction (DDI). - All Teachers September 2018 - June 2019 Principal - Assistant Principals 3. Teachers will participate in inter-visitation cycles to share best practices in components 3b, 3c, and 3d, provide descriptive peer feedback, determine the effectiveness of chosen instructional strategies, and determine and implement instructional modifications and/or scaffolds. - weekly - Master Teacher - All Teachers September 2018 - June 2019 - Teacher Leaders Principal - Assistant Principals - Master Teacher - weekly - Teacher Leaders 4. Professional learning sessions will focus on instructional strategies and protocols that promote effective discussion and questioning techniques, student engagement, and assessment to drive instruction. - All Teachers September 2018 - June 2019 Principal - Assistant Principals 5. Professional learning sessions will be facilitated to help teachers identify struggling students and make instructional modifications that include the use of tiered questions and differentiated learning activities to ensure that all students can access and engage with content. - Master Teacher - weekly - Teacher Leaders September 2018 - June 2019 Principal - Assistant Principals - Master Teacher - weekly - Teacher Leaders SWDs, ENLs, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage and under-credited) 1  6. Assistant Principals will conduct weekly “mini observations” or “learning walks” to provide ongoing, descriptive and actionable feedback to teachers on their progress with components 3b, 3c, 3d and student-led instruction. AP Supervision debrief meetings will focus on components 3b, 3c, and 3d to determine areas of strength and areas for improvement. Analysis of ADVANCE distribution ratings in November, March and June to monitor each teacher’s performance ratings in components 3b, 3c, and 3d. Eight-week cycles of inquiry as evidenced in teacher team/department binders and Google Drive documents will demonstrate the use of data in the classroom to inform instruction as well as the implementation of effective questioning and discussion techniques and student engagement. In February 2019, we will review data resulting from inquiry cycles (e.g., inter-visitation notes, common lesson plans, common formative assessment results, student work analysis forms, and department action plans) as well as ADVANCE 3b, 3c, and 3d and “mini observations”/ “learning walk” data. 7. Students will have the opportunity to receive after-school tutoring in all subjects Tuesday through Friday every week. Tutoring sessions will be held in the major subject areas. School administration and teachers will focus especially on ENL students in Cohort U who are struggling in their respective subjects and Regents. Teachers will be given the opportunity to invite other students to their sessions as they see fit, and may make it mandatory for students with parent permission. - ENL Coordinator - Special Education Coordinator - Principal - Assistant Principals - All Teachers September 2018 - June 2019 - weekly - monthly - each semester - teachers September 2018 - June 2019 - weekly - Principal -Assistant Principals - Guidance Counselors - Department Leaders - ENL Coordinator - Special Education Coordinator 8. Through Purposeful and strategic programming, students will take classes that are required for a timely graduation as well as take classes which would assist them in passing or getting 2  college ready scores in their Regents exams. Students will have an opportunity to earn up to 10 credits each semester which will allow for increased credit accumulation and the opportunity to take Advanced Placement and College courses in the upper grades. - students - Administration 9. Through the use of the APEX online learning system, students in the lowest third and Cohort U students that are in need of credits to graduate will have the opportunity to receive credit-bearing classes in which they were not previously successful in previous semesters. - students The start of each semester: September 2018 and February 2019 September 2018 - June 2019 - weekly - Program Chair -Guidance Counselors - Special Education Coordinator - Teachers - Principal -Assistant Principals - Guidance Counselors - Department Leaders - Special Education Coordinator - APEX Coordinator - Principal and Assistant Principals - Principal - Assistant Principals - Guidance Counselors - Program Chair - Teacher Leaders - Teachers Principal - Assistant Principals - Teacher Leaders 10. Scholarship data will be made readily available to all teachers immediately following the end of each marking period so that teachers can focus on each student individually who was not successful. Teachers will also have scholarship conferences with Administration if their scholarship report for any class falls below 80%, at which time teachers will show evidence that they have exhausted interventions and outreach options so that the student could be successful. 11. Students who receive less than 80 on the ELA and Math Regents will get additional Regents prep and will be given an opportunity to re-take these exams in order to get college-readiness scores. - students - teachers - a week after the end of each marking period Students who received less than 75 on the ELA Regents and less than 80 on the Math Regents September 2018 - June 2019 - during each Regents period 12. Teacher collaborative teams will implement common unit assessments, mock regents, midterms and final exams during each semester that are aligned to the regents exams. This will expose the students to the time and content knowledge needed to be successful as well as prepare them for taking such a high stakes exam. All students especially students in need of credit accumulation September 2018 - August 2019 - each semester 3  3b – Parent and Family Engagement and passing Regents - Teachers How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. A senior parent meeting will be held in the fall 2018 and in January of 2019 to review requirements for graduation and discuss calendar of support for their child. An ENL Night will be held for all ENL students and their parents to review graduation requirements, Regents and college requirements. Key personnel will be the Principal's cabinet and Department leaders. Breakfast with the Principal and APs is another way that families will be engaged to discuss the needs of the child and how to support the families. Key personnel is the parent coordinator who schedule these parents and facilitates communication to parents. These meetings are held monthly. Students and families will be provided access to assessment scores, participation grades, and other evidence of student progress and achievement regarding components 3b, 3c, and 3d through the use of Skedula and Google Classroom. Teachers will update student grades on a weekly basis via Skedula to inform parents of student progress in all subject areas. Teachers will contact parents of students in need of additional support and students will be enrolled in after-school and/or Saturday school classes. Parents will be invited to their children’s classes to observe evidence of questioning and discussion, student engagement, and assessment in instruction as well as attend and participate in student-led conferences. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 1. Per session for teachers and administration for Regents Prep 2. Per session for APEX Coordinator. 3. The creation of at least one course during the regular school day in each subject area that is devoted to improving skills in that content area. 4. Books, software, programs and supporting materials and supplies for students to assist in closing the credit accumulation gap and increase Regents pass rates in all content areas. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E X X Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 4  By February 2019, there will be an increase of 1% of ENL students showing that they are on track to a timely graduation as measured by the graduation tracker. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Progress to graduation report in January 2019 will be a mid-year measure of the goal. ENL Subgroup of Cohort U Graduation rate Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 5  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. In looking at the data from the School Quality Guide 2017 - 2018, trust in school leadership was the lowest rated component. In order for our school community to strive, we recognize that we need to build trust: trust in the school leadership, trust in our teachers and trust in our students and families. Therefore, we will work diligently this year to ensure that we build trust in our entire school community by being transparent and have a collaborative approach in all decision-making activities. Strengths: ● Open-door policy for teachers, parents, guardians and families ● Easy access to the Principal and the Administrative Team ● Acknowledge and celebrate important milestones and events in the lives of our staff ● Award students, staff and families for their contribution to our school community ● Good relationship with community organizations, leaders and elected officials ● Partnerships with community organizations and colleges ● Participation of parents and community organizations at our annual Multi-cultural Day festivities Priority Needs: ● Trust in the Leadership of the school ● Students trusting their teachers ● Team building activities for staff and student Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the 6  identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, trust in the school leadership and among the members of the school community will increase by 2% as measured by the New York City School Quality Guide. 7  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? 1. The school Leadership will share the Vision, Mission and the Instructional Focus of the school with the entire school community (staff, students and parents) and give them an opportunity to contribute and revise these documents as necessary so that they encompass all of our priorities. -students -staff -parents September 2018 to October 2018 - Principal - Assistant Principals - Master Teacher 2. Build a cycle of Team Building as part of our cycle of Professional Development on Mondays. Staff members will take turns leading the staff on a monthly team building activities in an effort to build trust and genuine rapport with each other. - staff September 2018 - June 2019 - SLT - PTA - COSA - Principal - Assistant Principals 3. Plan monthly grade-level town halls with students in an effort to build open dialogue with students on issues and concerns affecting them. During these monthly student-led town halls, students in collaboration with Student Government will plan the agenda and discussion topics and the school leadership will take notes of students' concerns and address them in a timely manner. 4. Plan awards ceremonies for students at the end of each semester which will be held during PTA meetings. Awards could include: student-of-the-month, Honor Roll, Principal's List, Academic Hall of Fame, parent-of-the-month, uniform awards, ect. -students - monthly - Master Teacher September 2018 - June 2019 - monthly - PD Committee - Assistant Principals - COSA - Student Government -Teachers -Students September 2018 - June 2019 - Administration - Parent Coordinator - Parents - Teacher Leaders - Celebrate the success of students in the various subgroups and provide the support they need to continue their success. - monthly -SLT and PTA board 8  5. Through team building activities, retreats and social events that will foster trust among staff members, we will work collaboratively and effectively in the common goal to build trust in school leadership and among staff members. - All staff September 2018 - June 2019 - each semester September 2018 - June 2019 - Administration -Master Teacher - Teachers - Principal - Assistant Principals -students - parents 6. Through weekly publications (The Village News) and communications such as PLC newsletters, morning announcements and emails; all members of the school community will be fully informed on the events that are taking place in the school community and given the opportunity to contribute to such publications. 7. Through weekly meetings with the Cabinet, monthly SLT meetings, monthly student Town Hall meetings and weekly staff meetings, Administration will continue a share decision-making policies where all members of the school community participate in making important decisions. 8. Throughout the year students, staff and parents will be acknowledged for their contributions to our school community. Students, staff and parents will be celebrated for various successes including academic awards, conduct and citizenship awards, professionalism awards and attendance awards. - staff - COSA - weekly - Teachers Leaders - Parent Coordinator - Teachers - Principal - Assistant Principals -students - parents September 2018 - June 2019 - staff - COSA - weekly - Teachers Leaders - monthly - Parent Coordinator - Student Government - SLT Executive Board - Principal - Assistant Principals - parents -students September 2018 - June 2019 - staff - weekly - COSA - monthly - Teachers Leaders 9. The creation of a PD committee which comprises of teachers, the Master Teacher and the Principal. The committee will create a PD calendar that will be geared to the achievement of our priorities for the year. - teachers - Weekly September 2018 - June 2019 - Parent Coordinator - Teachers - SLT Executive Board - Principal - Assistant Principals 9 10. The PD committee plan weekly Professional Developments with the Administrative staff and the Master Teacher to highlight staff strengths and share best instructional practices. These best practice sessions will be held during our Monday Professional Development where teachers and staff will learn and share instructional and class management strategies with each other that contribute to increasing student learning. 11. Non-evaluative weekly Learning Rounds will be held where members of the Learning Round committee will visit classrooms looking for evidence of rigor and our instructional focus in the classrooms. Then provide relevant feedback to the visited teacher and discuss any take-aways for the members of Learning Round committee. - support staff - Fridays - period 2 - Master Teacher - PD Committee - all students September - Principal 2018 and February 2019 - monthly - Assistant Principals - Master Teacher - Teacher Leaders - Teachers - PD Committee - teachers -Students September 2018 to June 2019 - Principal's Cabinet - Principal - Assistant Principals -parents - weekly - Master Teacher - Teacher Leaders - Teachers 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. The parent Coordinator will communicate weekly with families via the calling messaging system as well as using the Remid APP. The Principal will host monthly Breakfast with the Principal where parents will be invited to the classroom on Learning Walks. Teachers and Paraprofessionals will join with Administration, students and parents to conduct weekly Learning Rounds to look for evidence of rigor and our instructional focus in our lessons. Communication with the parents and families will be frequent and informative regarding school initiatives, events and activities. Awards ceremonies/events to students and parents will be strategically scheduled during PTA meetings and other parental engagement activities in an effort to maximize parental participation. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment 0  Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. - Per session for teachers and administrators - translation services - postal budget - per session for evening events - food budget for evening events - other various supplies for events - awards for students - Per session for after school and Saturday family engagement events. - Allocation for parent and student refreshments during family nights Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E X X Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A SIG X PTA Funded In Kind X X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019 there will be a 1% increase of parental involvement as measured by an in-house survey conducted during February 2019. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Data from school surveys on trust as recorded on the NYC School Quality Guide. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 1  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. It is always a struggle to get parents to attend family engagement activities, however, we have noticed that parents are more likely to attend such events when they are relevant and applicable to their lives and that of their families or when their children are being celebrated and recognized. This observation was made after analyzing parents' attendance at events throughout the year. For example there was an increase in parents' attendance during our ENL Night as the meetings and workshops were done in English as well as in their native language. During this meeting parents received immigration services information as well as training on how to navigate Skedula to monitor their child's progress and how to read their child's transcript. Strengths: ● Open-door policy for parents, guardians and families ● Easy access to the Principal and the Administrative Team ● Numerous staff members who are able to communicate with parents in their native language ● Good relationship with community organizations, leaders and elected officials ● Partnerships with community organizations and colleges ● Participation of parents and community organizations at our annual Multi-cultural Day festivities Priority Needs: ● Trust in Leadership ● Increase attendance of parents to parental engagement activities ● Increase attendance at SLT / PTA and parent-teacher conferences ● Create relevant workshops and job fairs for parents ● Offer English classes for our ESL parents 2  ● Offer GED classes for parents and families ● Semester awards ceremony for students ● Career Day for students ● Trust among members of the school community Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, the participation of families/ community members in school activities will increase by 2% as measured by the New York City School Quality Guide. 3  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? 1. Continue to cultivate a school atmosphere that fosters cooperation, collaboration and respect between parents, staff and students by implementing programs that will strengthen this relationship. These programs include meetings with parents of students in various subgroups; such as seniors, cohort classes, ENL students, ect; and other social events (eg. Family Holiday Fun Night, Thanksgiving Fest, Multicultural Day, Battle of the Academy, ect.) - parents - staff September 2018 - June 2019 -students - monthly 2. Create themed-based monthly SLT and PTA meetings to increase parental attendance, participation and trust. Strategies for targeting different student subgroups and their families include but are not limited to: - surveying students and their families for areas of high need, workshops /training that are vital to the success of the students and their families - parents September 2018 - June 2019 - monthly 3. Through collaboration with the Community School Director, organize relevant workshops, trainings and meetings for parents and families. These could include but not limited to: ENL Night, Skedula Training, English classes for ENL parents, job fairs, College Application Night, Financial Aid Night, Career Day, ect. - parents and families -students Throughout the year, September 2018 - June 2019 4. Plan awards ceremonies for students at the end of each semester which will be held during PTA meetings. Awards could include: student-of-the-month, Honor Roll, Principal's List, -students -parents & families - monthly - September 2018 and - Principal - Assistant Principals - Guidance Counselors - COSA - Student Government - PTA - Principal - SLT members -PTA Executive Board - Parent Coordinator - COSA - Teachers - Administration - Parent Coordinator -PTA Executive Board - Teacher Leaders - Principal - Assistant Principals 4  Academic Hall of Fame, parent-of-the-month, uniform awards, ect. - Celebrate the success of students in the various subgroups and provide the support they need to continue their success. - Parent coordinator -PTA Executive Board February 2019 - monthly 5. Purposeful, targeted and relevant communication with families about upcoming events in the school, through the following means: - Families -students September 2018 - June 2019 - Principal - Assistant Principals - parent newsletter - phone messagers - Remid APP - flyers , letters and brochures - Social Media - Guidance Counselors - weekly and monthly - Teachers - Parent Coordinator 6. Provide translated copies of all notices and communication for families that speak a language other than English. - All Parents of ELLs and SWD September 2018 - August 2019 Principal - Assistant Principals Schedule IEP Annual Review and Triennial conferences at a time that is convenient for parents, so that they can play a larger role in the planning of the appropriate supports for improved student outcomes. - throughout the year as necessary - Parents - Guidance Counselors - Teachers - Parent Coordinator Provide incentives for parents of at-risk/high needs students to get involved in their child’s educational program. 7. Provide parents with academic progress in the form of frequent report cards and progress reports so that they may monitor their children All parents September 2018 - August 2019 Principal - Assistant Principals Schedule guidance conferences with students and parents who are not meeting promotional requirements. 8. Collaborate with PTA and families to organize school spirit, team building and social gatherings for families and the ITAVA Staff, such as Thanksgiving Dinner, Holiday Family Fun Night, cultural celebrations, Battle of the Academies, Parent-staff and/or parent-student games. - 6 times each semester - Guidance Counselors - Teachers - parents & families September 2018 - June 2019 -students - Staff - monthly - Parent Coordinator - Principal - Assistant Principals - Guidance Counselors 5  9. The staff will engage students and their families at a Holiday Family Fun Night during the Holiday Season. Parents and their children will have a fun-filled night of games, arts, crafts and making ornaments alongside our staff members. This will give parents and students to have a social interaction with the school's staff as well as to get into the holiday spirit with food and games. -students - parents - families - Parent Coordinator - Teachers - Principal December 2018 - Assistant Principals - COSA - Teachers Leaders - Parent Coordinator - Teachers - SLT Executive Board - Assistant Principals - Parent Coordinator - Teachers - PTA Executive Board - Principal - Assistant Principals - COSA - Teachers Leaders - Parent Coordinator - Teachers - SLT Executive Board 10. The school will partner with the local NYC identification office to assist parents and families in getting a State ID, especially parents and students who may be undocumented. Through the collaboration with the PTA, teachers will provide resume writing workshops to parents and students who may be in search of employment. - parents - families November 2018 11. Through partnerships with colleges and various community organizations and businesses, our students will have an opportunity to earn college credits, complete community service and complete job internships. September 2018 - June 2019 -students - community organizations - colleges 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable.  Community Schools Inter-boro Counseling Services   Office of Senator Kevin Parker 6   Medgar Evers College  Berkeley College  Monroe College   Kingsborough Community College LIU Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. The resources needed includes: - Per session for workshop facilitators - translation services - postal budget - per session for evening events - budget for food for evening events - other various supplies for events - awards for students - Modification of Parent Coordinator schedule to include family nights and after school programs - Parent Coordinator overtime for Saturday Parent workshops. - Per session for Regents prep after school and on Saturdays - Per session for after school and Saturday family nights. - Allocation for parent and student refreshments during family nights Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E X X Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A SIG X PTA Funded In Kind X X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019 there will be a 1% increase of parental and family involvement as measured by a survey conducted during February 2019. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. 7  Parental involvement and parental outreach data as recorded on the NYC School Quality Guide. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 8  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Middle school assessment results, ESL assessments, IEP, teacher generated assessments, Regents results, MOSL data. Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Tutoring / Regents Prep: Delivery: These services are provided during: - after school and Saturday Regents Prep / tutoring. - one-to-one -small group activities and tutoring - pairs of students - Zero period for ENL and former ENL students: - whole class activities - Zero period - during the school day in all classes - After school - Every Saturday - At home using APEX - groups of special population students such as students with an IEP, or ELL students Strategies: - test-taking skills, content-vocabulary reinforcement, practice Regents questions and think-pair-share Modified Assessments: - differentiated assessments and personalized projects. Tutoring / Regents Prep: Mathematics Middle school assessment results, ESL assessments, IEP, teacher generated Delivery: These services are provided during: - Zero period 9  assessments, Regents results, MOSL data - after school and Saturday Regents Prep / tutoring. - one-to-one -small group activities and tutoring - Zero period for ENL and former ENL students: - pairs of students - whole class activities Science Middle school assessment results, ESL assessments, IEP, teacher generated assessments, Regents results, MOSL data Strategies: - test-taking skills, content-vocabulary reinforcement, practice Regents questions and think-pair-share Modified Assessments: - differentiated assessments and personalized projects. Tutoring / Regents Prep: - after school and Saturday Regents Prep / tutoring. - groups of special population students such as students with an IEP, or ELL students Delivery: - one-to-one -small group activities and tutoring - pairs of students - Zero period for ENL and former ENL students: - whole class activities - groups of special population students such as students with an IEP, or ELL students Strategies: - test-taking skills, content-vocabulary reinforcement, practice Regents questions and think-pair-share - during the school day in all classes - After school - Every Saturday - At home using APEX These services are provided during: - Zero period - during the school day in all classes - After school - Every Saturday - At home using APEX 0  Social Studies Middle school assessment results, ESL assessments, IEP, teacher generated assessments, Regents results, MOSL data Modified Assessments: - differentiated assessments and personalized projects. Tutoring / Regents Prep: - after school and Saturday Regents Prep / tutoring. Delivery: - one-to-one -small group activities and tutoring - pairs of students - Zero period for ENL and former ENL students: - whole class activities Strategies: - test-taking skills, content-vocabulary reinforcement, practice Regents questions and think-pair-share Modified Assessments: - differentiated assessments and personalized projects. Counseling At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) IEP, teachers’ referrals, classroom observations, assessment and attendance data These services are provided during: - Zero period - during the school day in all classes - After school - Every Saturday - At home using APEX - groups of special population students such as students with an IEP, or ELL students Small group; tutoring, one-to -one before or after school, Saturday school, during the day 1  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. 63 students. 1. We will purchase school supplies for all STH students, including book bags, notebooks, pens, pencils, calculator, ruler, dictionaries, ect. 2. We will purchase winter coats for students as needed 3. We will hold a Holiday Luncheon for the students before the Winter Break 4. Students will be provided with school supplies throughout the year Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). n/a 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2  n/a 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. N/A 3  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. In order to ensure that we attract highly qualified teachers and staff members at ITAVA: o Administrative team regularly attends hiring fairs to identify and recruit highly-qualified teachers. o The school administration works closely with the FSC human resources point person to ensure that non-highly qualified teachers meet all required documentation and assessment deadlines. o Mentors are assigned to support struggling and un-qualified teachers as well as teachers in their first year of teaching. Strategies for Recruitment : We have a hiring committee that is made up of our Department Leaders. When hiring teaching staff, the department leader first conducts a preliminary telephone interview with the applicant, followed by a face-to-face interview with the hiring committee. Once the applicant has successfully completed this interview, a demo lesson is scheduled for the applicant where the Administrative team joins the hiring committee. If the demo lesson was deemed effective by the committee, the applicant is scheduled to be interviewed by the Administrative team. We also have partnership with colleges: eg. Brooklyn College, NYU, Touro College, Hunter College and Medgar Evers College - to provide internships for Graduate students. 4  Retention and Assignments : All teachers are programmed to teach in their license area and are encouraged to develop elective classes in their content area. Prior to programming, teachers complete a preference sheet which states their grade and course of preference. Most of our teachers are programmed for their first preference course and grade. We introduce electives each semester based on teachers’ interest s and talents. Support : Staff members are encouraged to attend all staff development opportunities provided by our Master Teacher. These include monthly professional developments for Principals, Assistant Principals, Guidance Counselors, Lead Teachers, Parent Coordinators and other professional development opportunities for teachers and paraprofessionals. Content-based professional developments are also offered to teachers within their content areas in collaboration with DOE partnerships and community-based organizations. For example, professional developments for Health and Physical Education teachers, Art teachers, Science teachers, Math teachers and Guidance Counselors. These consistent professional development opportunities empower our staff to be well equipped to assist our students as well as ensure that they are continually striving towards becoming highly qualified in their respective field. All first and second year teachers are assigned a mentor and meets with their Mentor Teacher weekly to discuss pedagogy and strategies to ensure that they are successful. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). In order to improve student engagement across classrooms, a system of differentiated professional development was implemented in order to develop teacher capacity to implement strategies for productive engagement, and will result in an increase in overall teacher performance in Domain 3 of the Danielson Rubric.  Our Instructional focus (Productive Engagement) is collaboratively reviewed and revised during our Summer Institute  The Master Teacher conducts full-staff PD, with topics focused on developing teacher capacity around productive engagement strategies  An outside agency of instructional coaches, leads full-day professional developments throughout the year to provide teachers with PD around designing CCLS aligned unit plans and performance tasks. In addition to providing whole staff professional development, the coaches conduct classroom visits then provide targeted individualized professional development to teachers. 5   Assistant Principals conduct snapshots of observations looking for evidence of rigor and productive student engagement then gives feedback to teachers.  The Master Teacher meets with new teachers twice a week during their prep periods to discuss challenges, give them feedback on their instruction, debrief inter-visitations (where they visited her classroom) Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). N/A 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. At ITAVA our teachers are an integral part of the decision making process. Teachers meet in department and Academy / grade teams weekly to discuss a variety of topics including assessments, analysis of data and strategies to improve instruction. The administrative team meets with the Academy leaders bi-weekly and the department leaders weekly. Ultimately, these teacher leaders form the Principal’s Instructional Cabinet and all decisions are first discussed at the weekly Cabinet meeting. 6  Teacher teams engage in implementing and analyzing common core aligned unit plans with Level 3 or 4 tasks as measured by Webb's depth of knowledge that culminate in a performance based assessment which is added to the student portfolios at the end of each marking period. ● The instructional cabinet developed a common protocol for department teams to use when creating and looking at unit plans ● The teachers decided on a UBD structure and template for curriculum planning ● Department teams review unit plans ● Department teams analyze performance based assessments aligned to units ● The Department leaders collect curriculum maps and provide feedback on their alignment to the CCLS. ● During weekly instructional cabinet meeting time, the instructional cabinet will use the ITAVA teacher designed Unit Plan Guide to give feedback to their teachers on unit plans. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Column B Section Reference(s) 1,2, 3, 4, 5 1, 2, 3, 4, 5 1, 2, 3,4, 5 Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Federal Federal Federal Federal 456,188.00 0 18,520.00 12,976.00 x x 7  Tax Levy (FSF) Local 4,525,165.00 x 1, 2, 3, 4, 5 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. 8  Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 9  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. ITAVA, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students Our school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. Through the School Leadership Team, our school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of our school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. ITAVA will support parents and families of Title I students by: ● Providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology, ect. 0  ● Providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in the planning and decision-making to support the education of their children and to instill in their child study habits. ● The Parent Coordinator will foster a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress by the frequent mailings of progress reports and report cards. ● Providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments ● Providing parents access to their child’s grades on a regular basis through parent access to Skedula ● Sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand ● Providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, our ITAVA School Leadership Team will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; 1  ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to schools to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in our Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● Maintain a Parent Coordinator to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend our school and will work to ensure that our school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability grade-level curriculum and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESEA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Progress Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the ESEA; ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings, with flexible times, in the morning, afternoon and on Saturdays, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Parent “Back to School Night” to allow parents to meet their child’s teacher and get information that will assist them in helping their child in their respective subjects; 2  BY: Providing materials to support parents when helping their child with assignments ● Providing parents with the information and training needed to instill study habits with their child; ● The Parent Coordinator will foster a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress by the frequent mailings of progress reports and report cards; ● Providing parents access to their child’s grades on a regular basis through parent access to the Jupiter grades grading system. ● Sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities, in languages that parents can understand ● Providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of our school community; Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement Our school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or ParentTeacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● Developing and distributing a school newsletter and web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress. ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences 3  To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, our ITAVA School Leadership Team will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to schools to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in our Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● Maintain a Parent Coordinator to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend our school and will work to ensure that our school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability grade-level curriculum and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESEA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Progress Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the ESEA; ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings, with flexible times, in the morning, afternoon and on Saturdays, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Parent “Back to School Night” to allow parents to meet their child’s teacher and get information that will assist them in helping their child in their respective subjects School-Parent Compact (SPC) School-Parent Compact (SPC) ITAVA, is in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. 4  I. School Responsibilities: Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Elementary and Secondary Education Act (ESEA); Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; 5  ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand through our Telephone messaging system and by mail. ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; 6  ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Elementary and Secondary Education Act (ESEA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities: ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; 7  ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; III. Student Responsibilities: ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; 8  ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; 9  ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand through our Telephone messaging system, and by mail ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conference Provide general support to parents by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; 0  ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; Parent/Guardian Responsibilities: II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; 1  ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; III. Student Responsibilities Student Responsibilities: ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; 2  ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 3  Addendum: Community School Partnerships Directions: The Community School (CS) strategy is directly aligned to the Framework for Great Schools. Community Schools bring schools and community partners together and integrate academics, health, youth development, and family engagement to provide students with the tools and opportunities they need to succeed. The Core Services in Community Schools are Expanded Learning Time (ELT), Attendance Supports, Family Engagement, and Health & Wellness. Part 1 – Community School Partnerships Goal(s) How is the CS strategy integrated into academic instruction at your school, and what impact has it had on student academic outcomes? The CS strategy is integrated into academic instruction via a strategic advisory curriculum using Restorative Circles as defined by our partner, Morningside Center for Teaching Social Responsibility. The restorative justice themed curriculum empowers students to facilitate learning by offering students hands on experience with speaking and listening, leadership, public speaking, choosing topics of interest within the community to explore, guiding group discussions, problem solving as a team and working to implement solutions. The impact has been that students are taking an active leadership role within the school community to create the culture they wish to see by participating in student government, youth leadership council, school newspaper, volunteering to support school wide events, family engagement workshops, helping to update hallways and bulletin boards with featured student works and accomplishments, designing and executing murals reflective of the schools culture and values along with other initiatives to promote positive change. These positive shifts in culture, community and school environment have supported academics by motivating students to come to school regularly, complete assignments in a timely fashion, ask more in-depth questions in response to curriculum and feel more welcome and open in the school which in turn provides a more joyful and productive place to learn and grow academically as well as socially and emotionally. Indicate the summative goal(s) of the Community School for the 2018-19 school year. Be sure to construct the goal to be SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Realistic, and Time-bound. Specific goals of the Community School for the 2018 -19 school year are... - Increase yearly attendance average by 4%, from 91% average to 95% as documented in the New Visions Data Sorter Heat Map.  Identify and train Peer/Success Mentors to follow up with chronically absent students via in school and after school programming  Academy leaders/Guidance Counselors will continue to support teachers in calling home in response to student absences  Positive reinforcement communication with students and parents including, but not limited to comments on Skedula/Pupil Path, phone communication and letters  A wide variety of after school programs including, but not limited to Sports, Dance, Murals, Music, Event Planning, Coding/Computers, Social Media Marketing, Journalism, Student Government, Youth Leadership Council, Robotics, College Access, and a variety of academic support groups will be offered as student incentives for attendance  Advisory attendance competition  School culture activities like Spirit Week, Battle of the Academies, campus wide sports games, campus community movie night, Campus Talent Showcase, Black Excellence Assembly, Multi-Cultural Festival, Family BBQ…  Use Data Sorter to track attendance, chronic absences as well as tracking interventions, successes and challenges 4  The school teams will make adjustments and keep one another accountable - Improve relationship and collaboration between the 3 schools on the Tilden campus Implement monthly meetings between the 3 schools CSD's, PC's and AP's   Plan Campus wide Family Engagement Series  Work to collaborate and increase community traffic within the school through initiatives like Community Movie night, opening parent/family engagement offerings to ALL parents/families, sharing space more readily  Plan a Campus wide Health Fair, College Fair, Career Fair…  Encourage student collaboration through Youth Leadership Council, All Campus Talent Show and other combined campus offerings - Increase active parent engagement Increasing parent involvement is key to improving student attendance and student achievement   CSD’s and Parent Coordinator’s have monthly planning meetings to work together to support a series of Family Engagement Workshops and Events  Expand active email list by making sure Blue Cards are updated at grade level meetings  Create Remind App parent text list for more strategic parent communication  Welcome table with sign in sheets for parents at ALL events  Workshop schedules and events sent out for the year and followed up with calls/texts, flyers and student reminders Student involvement in parent events (presentations, sharing’s, mini performances…)   Expand parent attendance record from average of 6 to average of 30. Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Community School Annual Goal(s): How will achieving your Community School Goal(s)--in Expanded Learning Time (ELT), Attendance Supports, Family Engagement, and Health & Wellness--support your academic goals for students? Achieving the Community School Goals in ELT, Attendance Supports, Family Engagement & Health & Wellness will support academic goals for students by providing supports that educate the whole student. A well-balanced student with clear social emotional skills in place are better equipped to be effective in the world at large. When they fail a test, they learn from it and seek the help they need. If they get into a fight, they choose mediation rather than fists. If the stress of preparing for college feels overwhelming they have coping mechanisms and a support system to get them through. Unless the life skills, support systems and student health are in place it makes academic success even more challenging. These are the skills the students learn through our Community School Goals, leadership, self-confidence, public speaking, mindfulness, communication, problem solving and team work to simply list a few. Part 2 – Community School Partnerships Core Services Action Plan Part 2a. Identify the Community-based Organization (CBO) partnerships that you will develop in ELT, Attendance Supports, Family Engagement, and Health & Wellness, their target student population(s), and scope of the services 5 Target Population Scope of Service SY18-19 SMART Goal Paraprofessionals 24 hours of PD The Leadership Program 9th-12th graders The Morningside Center for Teaching Social Responsibility 9th-12th graders After School/Parent Engagement Teacher training and in school support for 9th-11th grade advisories OASIS 9th - 12th graders Small groups of 9th-12th graders provided. As well as supporting schools’ supportive environment and attendance work, CBOs should be helping to support your school’s instructional focus. CBO Partnership TRIAD Improve student academic success by giving paraprofessionals more specialized training Improve student attendance and community involvement through a variety of enrichment offerings Train faculty in restorative justice practices that can be modeled and integrated into advisory curriculum and every day conflict resolution 2 days a week a SAPIS counselor is on site to work with groups of 10-12 to educate, answer questions and discuss community issues around substance abuse prevention as well as students' social-emotional development, academic success, and post-secondary outcomes Part 3 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 3a. Indicate resources your Community Partnership will leverage to achieve your summative SMART goal(s) and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. The resources the Community Partnership will leverage to achieve the SMART goals and action plan are hiring and training staff, providing insurance, providing supplies, social and emotional support, on-going professional development, flexible schedules to meet the needs of the school as well as additional support as identified and addressed. Part 3b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA P/F Set-aside X 21st Century C4E 6  Title I 1003(a) X Title III PTA Funded SIG Grant School Achievement Other Funding Part 3c. Describe how the school will partner with the Lead CBO to do the following: 1. Community Schools are expected to partner with a community-based partner organization (CBO) and together with members of the School Leadership Team, hire a Community School Director. The Director will lead implementation of the asset and needs assessment process, and other critically important coordinating activities. Indicate how you will leverage this aspect of the work. Community Schools are expected to personalize the needs of all students, through strategic programming and services, as determined by the asset and needs assessment, and must also offer Expanded Learning Time (ELT) and mental health programming. In completing this section, ensure that you think about how: (1) the right services are provided to the right students and families at the right time; and (2) how you will seamlessly coordinate services with instructional programming happening throughout and outside of the school day. Indicate how you will implement this work, and describe other programming you anticipate to be in place to strengthen this initiative. Community Schools are expected to emerge as Partnership Schools, which are places where parents and families feel welcome, actively participate in the conversation and decision-making around the renewal of their schools, and have many opportunities to advocate for their children. Monthly meetings and Community School Forums engaging families and community stakeholders will be a critical part of this family engagement strategy. Describe how you will implement this aspect of the work. Community School Principals are expected to meet on a weekly basis with their Community School Director, select Assistant Principals, key staff, and other CBOs, to analyze trends in data and case manage individual students. Data tools – including the New Visions Data Sorter - and training will be available for schools to use. Indicate how you will implement this aspect of the work. 2. 3. 4. ITAVA and The Leadership Program partnered to hire a Community School Director in Fall of 2018 by holding an initial meeting, identifying the skills and personality traits the candidate needed to have and then creating a short list of appropriate candidates. In turn, Christina Neubrand, who had worked with the school previously providing after school programming and coordination was identified as the top candidate due to her prior relationship with the school community and diverse skill set in working in New York City schools for a variety of organizations, including The Leadership Program over the past 10 years. The CSD is partnering with key stakeholders including, but not limited to the L&G Research & Evaluation, Parent Coordinator, Principal, Assistant Principals, Dean, TRIAD, Morningside, OASIS, PTA, SLT and several classroom teachers to implement a needs assessment via an online survey to analyze and prioritize implementation for the 2018-19 school year. Organizing and providing after school programming is the top priority. The CSD will use student survey results to asses student interest in programming both academic and enrichment. Based on initial survey results and school needs the following will be offered via 21st Century. DANCE MUSIC MURALS 7  COMPUTERS SUCCESS MENTORS YLC PUBLIC SPEAKING PHOTOGRAPHY SOCIAL MEDIA EVENT PLANNING COLLEGE ACCESS TRAININGS/EVENTS FAM. ENGAGEMENT OFFICE SUPPORT 8  All after school and Saturday activities, including sports are integrated into a fluid menu of programming for the students in an effort to generate community spirit, collaboration and community. Mental Health Services are being offered via School Social Worker, Morningside, SAPIS, Guidance Counselors, Interborough and Peer Mediation Sessions. Referrals for specific services are made on a case by case basis in partnership with the Dean, Mental Health Professional on duty, student and family after assessing the need and creating an action for plan for improvement including initial time line, meeting schedule and follow up. Vision Screenings were provided in January of 2018 school wide and it is the plan to offer them again for the 2018-19 school year. Staff have been trained or are in the process of being trained by Morningside facilitator, Ava Daniels in Restorative Circles. The curriculum integrates restorative justice practices with coping skills, communication and creating safe space with discussions based on student challenges. The de-escalation and processing techniques being modeled by the teachers during advisory are then being shared with the student body. These techniques are encouraged and modeled during the school day as well as within the after-school initiatives. To strengthen this initiative the principal is using select weekly PD time to revisit the Restorative Circles framework, identify strategic classrooms/teachers to talk about best practices and address challenges as a unit to further develop a united community. This community school will emerge as a partnership school where parents and families feel welcome and validated by the Parent Coordinators and Community School Directors campus wide teaming up to create a monthly series of events and workshops. A parent survey was distributed and data collected in February of 2018 as to the best days/time for offerings as well as topics of interests. A calendar for the year will be distributed in September of 2018 with a variety of parent engagement and family offerings including, but not limited to College Support, Health & Wellness Workshops, Community Building activities, Student Sharing’s, Bring Your Parent to School Days, Parent Meetings, SLT, PTA meetings and events as well as school wide Parent & Family initiatives curated by the 3 CSD's building wide. The Community School Principal, Community School Director, Parent Coordinator and key Assistant Principals meet monthly to review goals, reflect on data and identify long term strategies, goals and initiatives to best support the community school game plan. Skedula is used to track data, grades, student attendance and parent correspondence. 9  The New Visions Data Sorter is being used to track attendance, identify chronically absent/late students and track what interventions are being used effectively. Part 4 – Community School Partnerships Oversight Part 4a. Key Staff and Partners 1. Name and describe the scope of involvement of all community partners working in the school (include partners supporting ELT, counseling, enrichment, etc.) 2. Name the members of your Community School Team and how meetings will be organized and structured to engage all stakeholders and be focused on results. 3. Explain data strategies including the use of the data sorter, and steps that the school will take to ensure that the appropriate interventions are provided to the right students Scope of Involvement of Community Partners  The Leadership Program and 21st Century has hired the CSD and several After School Teaching Artists to provide quality programming both after school and in school to support the community initiative. To improve quality of instruction and student interaction The Leadership Program is providing ongoing training, professional development and social emotional support to their employees placed in the school. The Leadership Program is also providing supplies and support mechanisms for the CSD like a lap top, organizational materials, office supplies, printer, camera and other support supplies as needed. The Leadership Program will also provide materials for the after-school program as needed, including, but not limited to art supplies, instruments, sound equipment, costumes and music.  21Century after school academics will support academic offerings such as Robotics, Journalism, Business Finance, Student Council, ELL Support, Creative Writing and Conversation.  TRIAD is providing 24 hours of professional development for the school paraprofessionals. They will identify and explore specific strategies to better accommodate their specific student. TRIAD will also provide opportunities for collaboration between the building Paraprofessionals including CAAS and Kurt Hahn to encourage community collaboration, networking and encourage a campus wide support system.  Morningside has a facilitator onsite 2 days a week pushing into student advisories to help implement the Restorative Circle curriculum while also modeling tools and techniques in action for the teachers. They also provide PD on select Monday afternoons to further train and support the teachers in restorative skills for self-care as well as student care.  OASIS provides a SAPIS counselor on campus 2 days a week. Ms. Bernay Howard works with groups of 10-12 to educate, answer questions and discuss community issues around substance abuse prevention as well as students' social-emotional development, academic success, and post-secondary outcomes. Interborough provides on onsite psychologist to support students social and emotional needs. After the initial visit and assessment students must provide insurance information in order to be seen regularily.   ESDVP is supporting Saturday academic opportunities for the 2018-19 school year including, but not limited to ESL, ELA, Social Studies, Science, Computer, Regents Prep, SAT Prep, College Access and Math. Students who need extra help are identified and these classes are added to their schedules. Through ESD there will also be lunchtime student groups to provide additional support in the form of ladies groups and gentlemen’s groups. 4 classes will be chosen to participate in an in school, 12-week Violence Prevention Workshop facilitated by The Leadership Program.  PSAL is providing a variety of campus wide sports offerings including, but not limited to Football, Soccer, Bowling, Swimming, Volleyball, Track, Basketball and the like. Part 4b. Indicate resources needed including human resources, instructional resources, and schedule adjustments to implement the Community School program. 0  Resources needed to implement Community School program are utilizing The Leadership Programs Human Resources department to handle CSD and Teaching Artists onboarding, pay, insurance and the like. Instructional resources needed include, but are not limited to basic supplies, curriculum, trainings, observations, feedback and support. Schedule additions include additional time added to AP's schedule at the UFT per-session rate to ensure an administrator is onsite for all after school offerings, making sure classroom teachers have availability and space availability to provide designated, academic after school programs. Part 4c. Timeline for implementation and completion, including start and end dates. Time line for implementation of after school and support programming is to begin programming the week of 9/24. The proposed end date is 5/23. We will adjust due to any weather days, schedule changes or other unforeseen conflicts as needed. Community School programming with be revisited at the close of the school year, changes made based on effectiveness and a plan created and implemented for summer program. Part 4d. Mental Health Work Plan Separate from this S/CEP, schools will complete a Mental Health Work Plan that will become an addendum to this document. 1  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 2  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: All ENLs participate in afternoon tutorials. All new entrants are screened to determine whether they are candidates for ENL/LEP, using appropriate and approved screening and diagnostic instruments. Further, the initial identification of ENL/LEP students through the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS) along with NYSITELL testing is completed within 10 days of enrollment. The parents are invited to attend an orientation session where they become informed in their native language of the different programs offered. The parent coordinators at our school together with the ENL coordinator provides families with assistance in placement. The NYSESLAT is used at the end of the school year to measure adequate progress. Title III funds allocated to ITAVA. will be used to provide supplementary services to the at risk ENLs, SIFE and long-term ENLs. NYSITELL results, NYSESLAT, Regents, and school based assessments will be used for placement purposes. The program will consist of the morning and after school small group supplemental instruction in Science - LE teacher ( LE teacher has an ENL certification), ELA and ENL ( two ENL teachers). The classes will be taught by licensed ENL teachers using ENL methodology. Based on the Regents data, RLAT report, credit accumulation report, SIFE tests, and CR Part 154, most of our ELLs need additional academic support. Most of current 9 grade students have just immigrated to United States and joined the school. They need in help in ESL , Math, Science, and Social Studies. Most of them are SIFE. Our current 9, 10 and 1 1 graders, 50%, joined the school between September 2017 and April 2018 and are SIFE. They need to take Regents in January 2019 and need to have additional support in Living Environment and Integrated Algebra. In June 2019, they will have to take Global, ELA, and US Regents, due to have language problems, these students need support in Social Studies as well. Our current 11 grade students need additional support in the ELA Regents prep, Social Studies Regents prep, and Geometry prep. Most of them are SIFE. Our current 12 graders need support in credit accumulation, Regents prep in ELA and Social Studies.Records are kept and maintained in AP office and in students files and are updated as needed. 1. Math –Fall/ Spring Semesters -24 weeks, twice a week, one hour each session, 48 sessions each semester, starting day the week of October 22 , 2018- the week of May 23, 2019, twice a week , after- school. - Sevices provided however, not out of Title III budget There will be 15 students in each group. 2. Science Fall/Spring Semesters -24 weeks, twice a week, one hour each session, 24 sessions ( 48 sessions in total) each semester, and the starting day is the week of October 22 , 2018- the week of May 23, 2019, twice a week , after- school. - There will be 15 students in each group. One dually certified ENL teacher (ENL and Living Environment) will be conducting instruction on Tuesdays, after school from 3:50: - 4:50 p.m. There will be 15 students in each group. 5.. ENL Fall/Spring Semester -24 weeks, once a week after school, one hour each session, from 3: 50 a.m. - 4: 50 p.m.. One certified ENL teachers will be conducting after school the week of October 22 , 2018- the week of May 23, 2019, . There will be 18 students in a group. 6. ENL Fall/ Spring Semester 24 weeks, once a week, one hour each session; 24 sessions, after-school One certified ENL teacher will be providing services,starting day the week of October 22, 2018- the week of May 23, 2019 . There will be 18 students in a group. 3  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information 7. Social Studies Fall/Spring October 22, 24 weeks , once a week, one hour each session after school starting day the week of October 22 , 2018- the week of May 23, 2019 - Global History 10, 11, and 12 graders and US History- 11 and 12 graders) . One ENL certified teacher will be providing services, 48 sessions . There will be 20-25 students in each group. 8. ENL Saturday classes Fall/Spring Semesters starting day ( 20 weeks, 4 hours per day, 120 hours), the week of October 22 , 2018- the week of May 23, 2019. Classes are provided by a licences ESL teacher to develop writing skills. 9. Trips to Natural Sciences are important for ELLs as it is an exposure to hands on Labs. Science teacher and ENL teacher will escort children to the museum. Hands on Labs are the part of the after school reinforcement in Science. In order to take and be better prepared to the Living Environment Regents examination that they all take in June 2019. ELLs have been engaged in these activities. Also, students need to be introduced to the culture and of the city of New York. Metropolitan Museum visits supports students in preparation to Global and US History examination. Visits to museums expand their horizons and enrich their experience and academic vocabulary. Proposed trips start in October 2018 until the end of May 2019, one trip a month. They will help ENL students to be better prepared to the Living Environment Regents examination that they all take in January 2019 and June 2019. 10. Title III budget - Achieve 3000 builds a foundation of fundamental vocabulary and essential language structure, phonemic awareness, and develops the English language skills for social interactions, learning to share your ideas, and opinions in English, and helps them to become college ready . It is a supplementary program for all ENLs and former ENLs.It supports Science and Social Studies as well. Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: Topic 1: Services for ENLs Rationale: To introduce services and programs for ENLs, NY City and State Mandates, types of programs and structure Date: October - Provider- ENL Teacher Audience: Teacher who participate in the Title III program and all teachers of ENLs Topic 2: Supporting ENLs' Achievement: Oral Language Development Rationale: To introduce strategies how to build foundations and to develop ENLs' oral language Date: October Name of Provider: ENL Teacher Audience: Teachers who participate in the Title III program and all teachers of ENLs Topic 3: Scaffolding strategies Rationale: To introduce types of scaffolding, structure and process Date: November Audience: Teachers who participate in the Title III program and all teachers of ELLs Topic 4: Academic Vocabulary and Disciplinary Language 4  Part C: Professional Development Rationale: To introduce strategies to engage students in activities that develop ELLs academic vocabulary and Disciplinary Literacy for ELNs to support their success in reading and understanding texts of increasing complexity. Date: February 1 and March 1, 2019 Name of Provider: ENL Teacher Audience: Teacher who participate in the Title III program and all teachers of ELLs Topic 5: Text Complexity in Content Area Subjects Rationale:To help prepare students to be college and career ready Date: April and May , 2019 Name of Provider: ENL Teacher Audience: Teacher who participate in the Title III program and all teachers of ENLs The Title III workshops have been specifically designed for ENL and Subject Area teachers who will be involved in the Title III Program. The focus of these P/D sessions will be how to infuse content area vocabulary and instruction in to the ENL classes. Content area teachers will have the opportunity to learn how to integrate ENL methodology. . As the outcome of these sessions, teachers will be ready to implement these strategies in ENL and Subject Area classes and be used by subject area monolingual teacher who have ENLs in their classes. Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: Parental involvement is encouraged through participation into our PTA, classroom activities and school events. Title III provides supplementary after-school services for ENLs as well as specific programs for parents of ENLs, such as: ENL classes, home services and computer classes. Parents complete an annual school survey, expressing their opinions regarding the school. The survey is evaluated on a yearly basis and improvements are made according to the specific needs of our parents. Parents are encouraged to attend our monthly meet and greet meetings to discuss their concerns. We have a parent coordinator who addresses parental needs, concerns, and directs parents to appropriate school personnel. The parent coordinator facilitates parental workshops such as: Topic 1: November-How to support students at home Rationale: To better support students at home with home work assignments Audience: Parents of ENLs Topic 2: December Computer Programs for ENLs used at 18K563 Rationale: To introduce support programs for ENLs used by ESL and Subject area teachers, Skedula, Achieve 3000, Think Through Math Audience: Parents of ENLs Topic 3 : January Structure of NYC programs: State Tests, School Credits, College Readiness, Career Readiness Rationale: Feb. How to Prepare Students for Standardized Tests Audience: Parents of ENLs 5 Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Rationale: March .NYC School Credits and Transcript, College Requirements Audience: Parents of ENLs will be notified via translated letters mailed home as well as sent home with students. ENL Parent Workshops will be conducted by the ENL teachers, guidance counselors, and the parent coordinator to demonstrate ways in which the parent can assist and prepare their children for the standardized tests NYSESLAT, Regents examinations in ELA, MATH, Social Studies Tests, and Sciences) Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits) n/a  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a 6  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 18 School Name It Takes a Village Academy Borough Brooklyn School Number 563 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Marina Vinitskaya Coach n/a ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Sima Ruchanskaya Teacher/Subject Area Mr. Reyes, Living Env Teacher/Subject Area Mr. Beaubrun, Math Related-Service Provider n/a Superintendent Michael Prayor Assistant Principal Anthony Veneziano Coach n/a School Counselor Jean Claude Blaise Parent Mr. Phillips Parent Coordinator Deborah Raymond Field Support Center Staff Member n/a Other (Name and Title) Ms. Kimberly Keiper ENL/Social C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 1 4 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program N/A Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 610 7 Total number of ELLs 91 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 14.92%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a 0 0 0 n/a n/a 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Opened (e.g., 2013-K 1 4 5 3 2 Lang. 14) Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? 18K563 is a high school. The school uses in-house Math, Science and ELA assessments, Scantron in ELA and Math , Achieve 3000 data to determine students' needs. Based on the assessments and prior education, all ELL students are placed in an appropriate, rigorous high school program with additional support through morning and afternoon tutoring and Saturday Academy. NLA support is offered after school in Haitian-Creole, Spanish, Arabic, Bengali, and French. All ELLs are encouraged to attend our Saturday Academy and After School Program. ELLs have been programmed for homework help in all subject areas in the after-school program. Also, ELLs are enrolled in elective classes such as Literacy in Science, History of Math, Literacy in Social Studies, PSAT prep, Research in Science, Art, Robotics, Music . The program is being utilized during the school hours and in the after school program. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? 8  We have teachers on staff who will provide translation in all listed languages. We have developed strong during the day, after school and Saturday program. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? We evaluate the success of programs for ELLs by measuring their achievments through school skill - based assessments, Common Core related units and assessments, Regents, NYSESLAT, Achieve 3000 data, Study Island data, Think Through math data, Math X data, SAT and PSAT results, and learn-to- Write data. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? Teaches meet every week and review students exam data, classroom data, attendance and services. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] 18K563 is a high school. Therefore, we do not use the Response to Intervention framework . 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. NYSESLAT modality breakdown data on RMSR is not available as of November 2014, however, according to the results of the NYSESLAT and performance indicators, the ELLs strongest and weakest modalities on grade level are the following: at the beginners’ level, for 40% of the students, listening and reading is the strongest modality. For 60%, speaking and writing is the weakest modality. Similar results are found for ELL students at the intermediate level, where reading and writing are the weakest modalities. At the advanced level, the strongest modality is listening, followed by speaking and then reading. The weakest modality is writing Paste response to question here: 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? We use Title I, Title III, ANA grant Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. Our ESL program is organized to include self contained ESL classes, push-in, co-teaching and block programming. Students at the Entering level receive 360 minutes of stand alone ESL instruction per week , 180 minutes of ELA co -teaching instruction per week with a licensed ESL teacher and a licensed ELA teacher. Emerging level of proficiency receives 180 minutes of stand alone ESL instruction per week and 180 minutes per week of team teaching with a licensed ELA and ESL teacher. Students at the Transitioning and Expanding proficiency levels receive 180 minutes of ESL instruction and180 minutes of English Language Arts instruction. The ESL teacher works collaboratively with the content area teachers on Literacy and content area instruction. The reduced ratio of teacher to students allows for small group and individualized instruction. Through guided instruction, strategy lessons, interactive experiences, and individualized instruction, the students are led to interact in, reflect, read, write, problem solve, develop and practice strategies in the second language. b. TBE program. If applicable. N/A 9  c. DL program. If applicable. N/A 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? We follow all CR Part 154 program mandates. Our ESL program is organized to include self contained ESL classes, push-in, co-teaching and block programming. Students at the Entering level receive 360 minutes of stand alone ESL instruction per week , 180 minutes of ELA co -teaching instruction per week with a licensed ESL teacher and a licensed ELA teacher. Emerging level of proficiency receives 180 minutes of stand alone ESL instruction per week and 180 minutes per week of team teaching with a licensed ELA and ESL teacher. Students at the Transitioning and Expanding proficiency levels receive 180 minutes of ESL instruction and180 minutes of English Language Arts instruction. Native Language supports include bilingual glossaries and dictionaries. In addition, Native Language Arts support in French, Haitian, Arabic, Spanish and Bengali is provided as well. The classes are taught by licensed ESL or subject area teachers using ESL methodology. In addition , these teachers of the following content areas are dually licensed: Social Studies, Science, and Math . 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. Part V: ELL Programming Students are exposed to all required subject areas based on the programs for 9, 10, 11, and 12 grade. Students take Regenst exams in the 9th, 10, 11 and 12 grade. ELLs graduation rate is 98-100% in the last 3 years. Students are grouped homogeneously based on ESL level proficiency (NYSITELL and NYSESLAT) and rate of progress. All classes are aligned with the New York standards and tailored to help ELL’s succeed in the Math and Living Environment Regents Exam. The prevailing methodology is the Understanding Language Approach. All teachers follow the scaffolding Instruction for English Language Learners in ELA and Math . Our primary focus is acquiring academic vocabulary and writing in all content area classes. All ESL teachers incorporate Achieve 3000 into their lesson planning. Math teachers also utilize the program Think Through Math. All material that are used in ESL classrooms are age and grade appropriate. Teachers use Common Core Aligned Units for ELLs designed by American Institute for Research ( DOE), Engageny.org, Springboard Collections that scaffold based on NEW York State Scaffolding recommendations and the textbook Collection series. Cooperative Learning, the workshop model, audio-lingual, and Principles of Learning are incorporated in daily instruction and student work in groups with the assistance of a paraprofessional. Many supplementary teaching aides are used such as visual books, workbooks and tapes. To help students acquire and develop English language skills, teachers engage them in role-playing, dialogs and trips which encourage students to communicate. They participate in classroom discussion and activities. Alternate strategies are used in the classroom such as mapping, semantics webs, word walls, diagrams and back stepping, all geared towards Principals of Learning communicating and improving language skills. In addition, students are encouraged to attend our After School Program. ELLs have been programmed for the homework help in all subject areas in the after-school program. Also, ELLs are enrolled in elective classes such as Literacy in Science. Our program consists of ESL classes from Level I through Transitional according to the results on the placement tests. In the Fall, ESL courses are offered for Levels 1,3,5. In the Spring Levels 1, 2, 4, and 6 are offered. ELL students attend 9th, 10th, 11th, and 12th grades and take either a triple, double, or a single period of ELL instruction based upon the students English ability (score on the NYSITELL, and NYSESLAT). Bilingual education is not offered as per parental choice. All classes are aligned with the new standards and tailored to help ELLs succeed on the NYSESLAT, and regents exams. The goal of the program is to identify key issues, develop and implement strategies needed to ensure that ELL students are held to the same high educational standards as all students. ELL students are provided with instructional programs designed to help them meet these standards by promoting literacy development in their native language and in English across subject areas and grades. General education classroom teachers in addition to the ESL teachers provide extensive literacy lessons differentiated by needs that expose children to the actual structure of the second language. Lessons take into consideration and build upon the ELLs’ background knowledge and expand their English vocabulary. Opportunity for discussions is frequent and elaborate responses are 0  encouraged. Students are monitored on an on going basis and instruction is modified based on academic need. • The reading and writing workshop model promotes second language development through natural 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? We ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their native language throughout the year, as appropriate. Students are offered regents exams in their native languages. Bilingual staff and/or translation services are available to assess students, as needed. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status We diffrentiate instruction based on students needs. Students get additional support through TitleI II, the credit accumulation program, morning, after-school and Saturday tutorials. Title III funds allocated to ITAVA. SIFE students are provided supplementary services. The program consists of the before and after school tutoring in Math, English, Science and Social Studies, Regents support and SAT support. Saturday Academy takes place on Saturdays. The goal of the Academy is to support at-risk students in Math, Science, Social Studies, Sciences, PSAT prep and Regents prep, and provide individual attention. NLA support in French, Haitian, Arabic, Spanish and Bengali is provided as well. The classes are taught by licensed ESL or subject area teachers using ESL methodology. We address the needs of newcomer ELLs through the use of strategies that include Cooperative Learning, the workshop model. Materials include audio-lingual, smartboards, visual books, workbooks and tapes. To help students acquire and develop English language skills, teachers engage students in role-playing, dialogues and trips to develop communication skills. ELLs receiving services for 4 to 6 years are encouraged to attend our After School Programs. They are programmed for homework help in all subject areas in the after school program. In addition, they are enrolled in elective classes including Literacy in Science and Literacy in Social Science. Our plan for long term ELLs includes attending our Saturday Academy and After School Program, as well as the morning tutorial. Strategies include mapping, semantic webs, word walls, diagrams and back stepping. All former ELLs in years 1 and 2 after attaining proficiency continue to receive stand alone 90 minutes of ESL instruction per week, as well as all ELL testing modifications as per NYS regulations. In addition, these students are invited to attend the morning and afternoon tutorials and m attend Saturday School Academy program. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? We use content based and differentiated instruction, scaffolding of academic language , one -to -one support, and small group instruction. In addition, glossaries and bilingual dictionaries are used in every classroom. In ESL classrooms, there are bilingual libraries to help support native language. All students have access to computers for translation if needed. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? Our teachers target instruction to focus on students' IEP goals. Approximately 20 % of all our classless are Integrated co-teaching classes where scaffolding in an integral part of lesson planning. Teachers are also afforded the opportunity to co-plan twice a week during their department and Academy meetings. During this time teachers are able to articulate and plan for their students and classes addressing specific student needs. This model ensures that the needs of students performing in the lower 1/3 of our population, which includes our ELLs and SWDs are afforded the attention and student's specific areas of need are addressed. Furthermore, students have been scheduled for morning and afternoon tutorials and Saturday School Academy. 1  8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. Our interventions programs targeted for ELLs are the following: Saturday School Program that help students to prepare for Regents examinations , credit accumulation and enrichment. Morning and After school programs are offered to give additional support for ELLs in ; ELA, Math, Science and Social Studies. In addition, students are offered the opportunity to get assistance via the Committed Citizens for Excellence in Youth Education and Healt, Inc. This organization offers regents and SAT preparation , Career building and homework help from Monday- Friday 4:00-6:00 P.M. In addition, our Saturday School Program includes NLA classes in Haitain-Creole and Spanish for our ELLs. General education classroom teachers in addition to the ESL teachers provide extensive literacy lessons differentiated by needs that expose children to the actual structure of the second language. Lessons take into consideration and build upon the ELLs’ background knowledge and expand their English vocabulary. Opportunity for discussions is frequent and elaborate responses are encouraged. Students are monitored on an on going basis and instruction is modified based on academic need. • The reading and writing workshop model promotes second language development through natural and explicit exposure to reading and writing that is meaningful, standards-based and is modified for the ELL students. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? We are not considering any new programs for this year. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? We are not planning to discontinue any services or programs at this time. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. All ELLs are afforded equal access to all school programs including elective classes such as Literacy in Science, History of Math, Literacy in Social Studies, PSAT and SAT prep, Research in Science, Art, Robotics, Music, morning and afternoon school tutorials and Saturday School Program. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. The following instructional materials are used to support ELLs: Roseta Stone, St Math, Study Island and Achieve 3000 which provides support in Spanish and Haitain-Creole, books on tape and leveled books from Pearson in Science and Social Studies support ELLs with improving their listening, comprehension and reading skills in content area subjects. All classrooms have SmartBoards and technology is incorporated into each lesson. And as previously stated, all ESL classrooms have bilingual libraries, bilingual dictionaries and glossaries are in every content area classroom. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? We do not have a Bilingual or a Dual Language program. Therefore, native language support is delivered in our ESL program through the use of bilingual glossaries, dictionaries, native language books and translations by our bilingual teachers and students. Including technology such as computers that students can use to translate when needed. ENL: Beginning: 3 units of study per week (540 min.). We provide 700 minutes. STAND-ALONE ENL 1 unit of study in ENL 180 minutes; INTEGRATED ENL 1 unit of study in ENL/ELA (180 minutes.) and 1.0 unit of study Social Studie taught by dually licensed ESL/SS teachers, and 1 unit of LE taught by dually licences ESL/Science teacher EMERGING - (Low Intermediate) 2 units of study per week - (360 min.) ; 1 unit of study in ENL - 180 (mandated - 90 min.) ; 1 unit of study in ENL/ELA (180 min.) and 1.0 unit of study Social Studies taught by dually licensed ESL/SS teachers- 180 minutes, mandated 90, and 1 unit of LE taught by dually licences ESL Science teacher - 180 minutes -additional support; TRANSITIONING - (Intermediate ) - ENL - 1 unit of study per week (180 min.) ; We provide 360 minutes. INTEGRATED ENL - 1 unit of study in ENL/Core Content Area - 180 min -mandated (90 min.) and 1.0 of Social Studies taught by dually licensed ESL/SS teacher - 180 minutes; EXPANDING (Advanced) - 180 minutes total - We provide - 360 2  ENL INSTRUCTIONAL TIME - 1 unit of study per week (180 min.) and 1 unit of study in ENL/SS - Core Content Area -(180 min.) COMMANDING -(Proficient) Former ELLs must continue to receive services for an additional two years - mandate 0 .5 unit of study per week of INTEGRATED ENL in ELA/Core Content Area, or other approved Former ELL services for two additional years. We p[rovide 180 minutes and SS taught by fually licensed ESL/SS teacher - 180 minutes. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. All required services support and resources are Common Core aligned and correspond to the ELL's ages and grade levels. Moreover, materials that are used in the classroom are age and grade appropriate. Teachers utilize EngageNY, Springboard, Collection Textbook series. We are a high school and therefore all materials that are purchased and recommeded by NYS and NYC are for grades 9-12 accordingly. Teachers modify materials by supplymenting with glossaries, picture dictionaries, audio and visual materials. The texts that are being used in the classrooms are not simplfied. Teachers provide extended scaffolding instructions. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? The following instructional materials are used to support ELLs: Roseta Stone, St Math, Study Island and Achieve 3000 which provides support in Spanish and Haitain-Creole, books on tape and leveled books from Pearson in Science and Social Studies support ELLs with improving their listening, comprehension and reading skills in content area subjects. All classrooms have SmartBoards and technology is incorporated into each lesson. And as previously stated, all ESL classrooms have bilingual libraries, bilingual dictionaries and glossaries are in every content area classroom. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). All students, including newly enrolled ELLs, are invited to attend an open house prior to the beginning of the school year. Newly enrolled ELLs meet with the Principal, Assistant Principal and/or Guidance Counselor to assist with a smooth transition to our school. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? Language electives of Spanish and French are offered to all students at ITAVA, including our ELLs. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? N/A Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? Professional development is achieved through the combined efforts of experienced content specific, and licensed personnel that includes: Team teachers, assistant principal, self contained ESL teachers and the ESL support specialist. The professional development goal for the 2015-2016 school year is two-fold. First, pertinent personnel will work with the staff to analyze and disaggregated data for all ELL’s. Secondly, teachers will utilize the information from the disaggregated data to plan small group 3  instruction, group students by area of need and individualize instruction. Teachers will continue to meet to plan curriculum units of study, gather and share resources and materials with the grade facilitators and ESL teachers. ESL teachers will work together and articulate with the general education teachers, on student goals and progress. Inter visitations and debriefing sessions will continue to provide the staff with ESL methodologies and best practices. Paste response to question here: The ESL support specialists will attend workshops provided by the Office of English Language Learners and turnkey information at grade meetings. In addition, all ESL teachers have participated in professional development that is offered by DOE for ELA teachers to support their implementation of the ELA textbook series Collection, which is Common Cored Aligned and recommended by the Department of Education. These PD's have assisted ESL teachers in supporting how to work on complex text, academic vocabulary, prepare for the new regents examination in ELA , incorporating technology in the ESL classroom and differentiate instruction. Furthermore, study groups are provided to all of our teachers on supporting our ELLs in reading and writing as well as planning for small group work in order to scaffold language development. In addition, various lunch and learn workshops will be offered to all ESL and content area teachers as well as administration and paraprofessionals . The focus of these sessions are to examine the Common Core aligned units of study in reading and writing, develop appropriate mini-lessons and utilize all the components of the Balanced Literacy (read aloud, shared reading, shared writing, interactive writing) to scaffold the curriculum. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. In addition, we will use these sessions to provide ESL training to all teachers who work with English Language Learners and ESL training to all teachers who work with Special Education English Language Learners. Additionally, ESL and content teachers, coaches, administrators, and school secretaries participate in Professional Development offered by our network Achievement Coach and network ELA and Math Study Groups. Our tentative Professional Development Calendar includes, but is not limited to the following dates and topics: September 8, 2015 - Questioning and Discussion Techniques October 5, 2015 - QTEL Strategies November 16, 2015 - Using Assessment in Instruction December 7, 2015 - The Reading and Writing Connection January 11, 2016 - Curriculum Planning March 14, 2016 - Looking at Student Work April 18, 2016 - Student Engagement May 16, 2016 - QTEL Training Paste response to question here: Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? Parental involvement is encouraged through participation in our PTA, classroom activities and school events. The school has an affiliation with Century 21 grant , which provides after school services for students including ELLs as well as specific programs for parents, such as: ESL classes, home services (to help parents with family issues), family counseling and GED program. Parents complete an annual school survey, expressing their opinions regarding the school. The survey is evaluated on a yearly basis and improvements are made according to the specific needs of our parents. Parents are encouraged to attend our monthly meet and greet meetings to discuss their concerns. We have a parent coordinator who addresses parental needs, concerns, and directs parents to appropriate school personnel. The parent coordinator facilitates parental workshops such as: Computer workshops; 4  Preparing your child for the Standardized Tests, College and Career Readiness. Translation for parents is available via our staff. The vast majority of our staff are bilingual in Spanish, French, Haitain -Creole and Bengali. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. ESL teachers and Guidance Counselors conduct on-going orientation sessions for parents, providing them with important information regarding program placement and program availability. In addition, ESL teachers conduct on-going orientation sessions for parents, providing them with important information regarding program placement and program availability. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. It should be noted the an ELL SIFE graduated ITAVA in three years with the Advanced Regents diploma in June 2010 and started college education. 2011- All ELL students ( 36 graduated from HS and 18 graduated with the Advanced Regents Diploma;Most of them were SIFE. HS graduation rate was 90.7% 2012 - All ELLS graduated with Regents diploma -27 and 10 graduated with the Advanced Regents Diploma; 90% were SIFE and two were SWD; HS graduation rate was 89% 2013 - 92 of ELLS graduated with Regents diploma -31 and 10 graduated with the Advanced Regents Diploma; 90% were SIFE and two were SWD; HS graduation rate was 89.7 % 2014 - 94% of all ELLS graduated with Regents diploma -27 and 10 graduated with the Advanced Regents Diploma; 90% were SIFE and three were SWD; HS graduation rate was 90% 2015 - 95% of all ELLS graduated with Regents diploma -27 and 10 graduated with the Advanced Regents Diploma; 90% were SIFE and four were SWD; HS graduation rate was 92. 4% 2012- Also, ELL students were the part of Robotics team that became # 1 in March 2011 in the City of New York. 2013, 2014, 2015 - Also, ELL students were the part of Robotics team that became the finalits of Robotics competitions in March 2013, 2014, 2015 in the City of New York. 5 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Marina Vinitskaya, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 6  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: School DBN: Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Marina Vinitskaya Title Principal Anthony Veneziano Assistant Principal Ms. D Raymond Parent Coordinator Sima Ruchanskaya ENL/Bilingual Teacher Mr. Phillips Parent Mr. C. Reyes- Science Teacher/Subject Area Mr. G. Beaubrun- Math Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach Mr. Jean Claude Blaise School Counselor Mr. Michael Prayor Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 7 2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools School Name: It Takes a Village Academy Superintendent: Michael Prayor DBN: 18k573 The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Anthony (*Primary) Veneziano AP yes yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. The first step for the initial identification of those parents who may possibly be in need of translation and interpretation services begins at the time of their children's enrollment. The Assistant Principal, Mr. Anthony Veneziano, and the ESL support specialist, a licensed ESL teacher, meet with the parents to make an initial determination of the parents and child’s home language. The screening process is formalized through a Home Language Identification survey (HLIS) to determine NYSITELL eligibility for students. Parents are provided with the HLIS in their native language and are informed of their right to an interpreter. If the home language is other than English or the parent’s native language is other than English, an informal parent interview is conducted in both English and the parent’s native language to determine language dominance and needs for translation and interpretation services. 8  The ESL support specialist conducts all informal interviews in English. Translators assist the support specialist in conducting informal interviews in languages such as French, Haitian Creole, Arabic, Bengali, Fulani, and Spanish. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral 1 14 7 2 2 32 1 113 0 1 1 750 1 1 45 1 AFRIKAANS ARABIC BENGALI (BANGL CHINESE ANY CROATIAN FRENCH FULANI HAITIAN CREOLE MANDARIN NAHUATL NEPALI ENGLISH RUSSIAN SHLUH SPANISH URDU 0.1 1.44 0.72 0.21 0.21 3.29 0.1 1 15 7 1 2 21 1 0.1 1.54 0.72 0.1 0.21 2.16 0.1 11.63 134 13.79 0 0.1 0.1 1 1 1 77.16 738 0.1 0.1 4.63 0.1 1 1 46 1 0.1 0.1 0.1 75.93 0.1 0.1 4.73 0.1 9  3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. French, Haitian Creole, Spanish Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. Our school disseminates the following documents that are required for translation; school calendar of events, before and after school programs, monthly PTA and SLT meetings, monthly school newsletters, parent-teacher conferences, etc Every month; e.g. August 31, 2018 September 2018 October 2018 November 2018 We have teachers on staff who will provide translation in all listed languages. We provide letters in their home languages and translate during meetings and telephone calls. We create special meetings with parents of ENLs every month We provide letters in their home languages and translate during meetings and telephone calls. We create ENL parent Academy every month We translate meetings We invite parents to school to observe instruction every month We provide letters in their home languages and translate during meetings and telephone calls. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide interpretation service(s)? All interpretation services are being provided by school staff and parent volunteers. The school has created a 00 We have teachers on staff who will provide translation in all listed languages. Every month; e.g. August 31, 2018 September 2018 October 2018 November 2018 list of teachers and staff members who speak foreign languages. All teachers based on their availability provide interpretation services whenever they need help. When parents come to school, the school secretary , parent coordinator, and guidance counselor all of whom speaks French and Haitian Creole provide support.In addition, our guidance counselor and assistant principal speak Spanish. If they need speakers of other languages, they have schedules of the teachers who can provide assistance. In the event that a parent needs translation to a language which no one on staff speaks, we contact the Translation and Interpretation Unit for assistance. Translators are available at all school events, including parent orientations, open school nights, etc. We invite for Academy meetings every month We invite for Department meetings every month We invite for meetings with the principal - "Breakfast with the Principal" once in two months We have teachers on staff who will provide translation in all listed languages. We have teachers on staff who will provide translation in all listed languages. We have teachers on staff who will provide translation in all listed languages. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. 60 % of our staff is bilingual in French, Haitian Creole or Spanish. Guidance counselors will make the necessary emergency outreach to families if necessary with the assistance of a staff member. In addition, letters are provided in their home languages and translate during meetings and telephone calls. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 will be distributed, discussed and reviewed at the first faculty conference in Sept 2018. Staff will be made aware of different translation resources that are available. In addition, 50% of our school staff is 01  bilingual in French, Haitian- Creole and Spanish, therefore, we are able to provide in house translation of school letters as well as translations during meetings and/or via telephone calls. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) The school follows Chancellor's regulations and provides services written services by informing parents through mailing letters to parents. When parents need to be informed immediately, the school personal who speaks the native language of a family places a phone call. Also, the school uses documents translated by Department of Education. Notices are posted in the office informing parents of translation services. Student report cards, progress reports, safety notices, etc. are translated and sent home in English and the families' preferred language of communication. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? The Parent Coordinator and ESL teachers conduct on-going orientation sessions for parents, providing them with important information regarding program placement , program availability, PTA meetings and school events. • In addition, via our monthly PTA meetings, parent surveys, as well as our school's " open door policy" for all parents who are welcomed to come and share their comments and concerns. Our parent coordinator who is bi-lingual also addresses parental needs, concerns, and directs parents to appropriate school personnel. 02 
