 06M008 School Name: P.S. 008 LUIS BELLIARD Principal: WASHINGTON HERNANDEZ 2018-19 CEP-CS 1  Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC)   Section 1: School Information Page School Information School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: The Luis Belliard School 06M008 310600010000 Pre-K - 5 School Number (DBN): 465 West 167 th Street, New York, NY 10032 212-928-4157 212-928-4072 Phone Number: Luis Fernandez Fax: Email Address: Lfernan6@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): Washington Hernandez Robert McDougall HortenciaVivas Karen Sestak N/A ArneryReyes, Children's Aid Program Director CBO Representative: District Information Geographical District: 6 Manuel Ramirez Superintendent: 4360 Broadway, Room 419, New York, NY 10033 Superintendent’s Office Address: Mramire4@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 917-521-3757 Phone Number: Manhattan FSC: 917-521-3797 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) Yuet Chu Executive Director:   Executive Director’s Office Address: 333 Seventh Ave 8 th Floor, New York, NY 10001 ychu@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 646-470-0721 Phone Number: 917-339-1765 Fax:   Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Washington Hernandez Robert McDougall HortenciaVivas N/A N/A Arnery Reyes Luis Fernandez SonelisSeverino Karen Sestak Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/School Staff Member/ School Staff Member/ School Staff /Chairperson   Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Julia Gutierrez MarthaSanango Maria Cruz SendyTorres Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/   Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with   the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement   Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Public School 8 Manhattan’s Mission: We will afford all children the opportunity to be responsible, creative, well-adjusted individuals by providing character education and comprehensive support services. Through shared decision-making, collaborative planning, differentiated and small group instruction, we will promote a strong foundation of knowledge, skills, and experience in order to raise academic achievement.   2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. Public School 8 Manhattan, located in the neighborhood of Washington Heights, has a student population of 502, 96.58% of whom are classified as Hispanic. During the 2018-2019 school year, workshops will be heavily focused on integrating best practices in literacy and mathematics--- which includes, but is not limited to, the formulation of data-driven, small group instruction in all classrooms and the implementation of effective teaching strategies that will advance all of our students’ learning. Furthermore, literacy and mathematics intervention groups have been expanded to meet the needs of our students. Additionally, vertical teams, such as the professional learning team and the MOSL committee, consisting of teachers from across all grade levels and specialties, have been established. These teams will analyze data, identify gaps, and determine school-wide and grade-wide strategies to implement. Furthermore, team members will facilitate data meetings and professional learning sessions to help individual teachers with specific strategies that will improve instructional practices. In addition to the professional development support, classroom libraries purchased during our partnership with CUNY-NYSIEB, are being utilized within our balanced literacy program to promote our students’ English and home language literacy development. Also, the administration works closely in conjunction with the Parents Association to facilitate workshops aimed at showing parents/guardians how to best support their children’s academic and social-emotional needs at home. Since 1995, Public School 8 Manhattan has partnered with the Children’s Aid Society. The NYC Department of Education/Children’s Aid Society’s schools are based on a “developmental triangle,” which calls for a strong instructional program, expanded learning opportunities through enrichment and services designed to remove barriers to children’s learning and healthy development. Effective educational reform strategies need to address both teaching (excellent instruction, rigorous curriculum, timely assessments aligned with instruction) and learning (student health, wellness and engagement; plentiful opportunities to apply academic knowledge through challenging enrichment activities; support and encouragement from parents). PS 8 offer a comprehensive, integrated approach to education that extends the hours, services and partnerships of traditional public schools. PS 8 Manhattan is open all day and well into the evening, during holidays and the summer. Our school will continue its partnership with New York Presbyterian Hospital and the Turn 2 Us program funded by Derek Jeter’s ‘Turn 2 Foundation, Inc. This program supports our students’ positive social-emotional development in various ways. Professional development on utilizing strategies that support students’ social-emotional development is afforded to administration, teachers and supporting staff, both in and outside of the classroom. In addition, parents/guardians are provided with professional development on strategies that support their children’s social-emotional development at home. Also, Turn 2 Us offers programs to targeted students that provide them with strategies on how to cope with anger, loss, and frustration. Additionally, the activities are designed to teach students the value of teamwork and develop their ability to express themselves in a healthy fashion. Such activities sponsored by the Turn 2 Us program are Public School 8 Manhattan’s sports teams (baseball and basketball) and a drama club facilitated by the Columbia Cares program for the upper grades students. It is Public School 8 Manhattan’s goal, with the partnerships mentioned above, to increase academic rigor while creating a more supportive environment for all members of our school community. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. As of October 2018, 41.0% or 206 students at Public School 8 Manhattan are classified as English language learners (ELLs). The 2017 NYSESLAT results are as follows: 2018 NYSESLAT Results By Grade and Proficiency Levels 0  Grade Entering Emerging Transitioning Expanding Commanding Sept. June Sept. June Sept. June Sept. June Sept. June 14 9 3 4 1 3 8 K 1st 6 2nd 2 3rd 2 4th 3 5th 3 Total 34 12 28 24 3 4 1 2 1 1 8 6 0 7 3 4 9 10 13 6 6 7 51 10 12 9 11 1 4 47 11 18 18 20 18 15 14 11 11 8 19 24 91 96 3 1 17 8 11 3 43 P.S. 8 Manhattan’s ELL Students’ Progress in the 2018 NYSESLAT Assessment No. of Ss that remained on the No. of Ss that progressed levels or more same level 1 level No. of Ss that progressed 2 No. of Ss that regressed 12 22 21 13 8 24 100 14 11 13 11 11 6 66 11 4 0 4 1 3 23 5 5 0 3 1 1 15 Grade K 1st 2nd 3rd 4th 5th Total  Of the 100 students that remained on the same proficiency level, 41 students showed progress within the  level. In total, 130 out of 204 (64%) English language learners demonstrated progress in the 2018 NYSESLAT assessment.  Of the 42 SWD students tested, 18 students increased one or more proficiency levels, 23 students remained at the same level and 2 students regressed. Additionally, our English language learners (ELL) have shown increases in both ELA and mathematics proficiency as evidenced by the 2017 NYS ELA and Math assessments. In ELA, the percentage of Level 1 students decreased by 28 percentage points, from 79% in 2017 to 51% in 2018. The percentage of Level 2 students increased by fifteen percentage points from 21% in 2017 to 36% in 2018. The percentage of ELLs attaining a Level 3 or 4 in the 2018 NYS ELA test is 13%, compared to 0% in 2017. In mathematics, 22% of our ELLs achieved a Level 3 or 4; this is an 11 percentage point increase from 2017. As of October 2018, Public School 8 Manhattan has 92 Students with Disabilities (SWDs), 18.33% of the student population. Currently, we offer three self-contained special education classes (K-1; 2-3; 4-5) as well as four ICT classrooms (K, 1st, 2nd, 3rd & 4th). Additionally, we have one ICT teacher on staff who provides SETSS services to students. As evidenced by the 2018 NYS ELA assessment, 68% of our third to fifth grade SWDs attained a Level 1. That is a decrease of 21 percentage points when compared to the 2017 NYS ELA assessment. Furthermore, there was a 19 percentage point increase in students achieving a Level 2, from 11% in 2017 to 30% in 2018. Two percent of our SWDs 1  attained a Level 3 on the 2018 NYS ELA assessment compared to 0% in 2017. In addition, as evidenced by the 2018 NYS Math assessment, 54% of our third to fifth grade SWDs attained a Level 2. That is a decrease of 26 percentage points when compared to the 2018 NYS Math assessment. The percentage of SWDs achieving a Level 2 increased by 1%, from 20% in 2017 to 21% in 2018. Twenty-six (26) percent of our SWDs attained a Level 3 or 4 on the 2018 NYS Math assessment compared to 0% in 2017. In order to continue to support these subgroups of students, one IEP teacher, two out of classroom ENL teachers, and members of the school's instructional cabinet are providing academically rigorous, targeted instruction to our Levels 1 and 2 ENL and SWD students in both ELA and mathematics. The mathematics, literacy and universal literacy (ULIT) coaches provide teachers with on-site professional development that specifically addresses the needs of these students in all subject areas. Teachers participate in cycles of inquiry and professional learning sessions where they are taught and given opportunities to implement academically rigorous strategies in the classroom. Professional learning sessions are focused on how teachers can utilize the students’ home language in order to support students’ English language development and overall academic development in all subject areas. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. In reviewing our 2017-2018 School Quality Guide, the School Leadership Team (SLT) observed that Public School 8 Manhattan performed best in the elements of Trust (Survey Element Score of 3.67) and Strong Family-Community Ties (Survey Element Score of 3.87). Our area of need and the school’s focus for the 2018-2019 school will continue to be Supportive Environment. As evidenced by the 2017-2018 School Quality Guide, Public School 8 Manhattan earned a Survey Element Score of 2.93 in Supportive Environment. Although we increased our survey score by .63% (from 2.30 to 2.93), Supportive Environment, when compared to the other five elements in the Framework for Great Schools, is the area where Public School 8 Manhattan continues to struggle, . In addition, P.S. 8 scored below both the District and City averages in all sub-sections within the element of Supportive Environment (Classroom Behavior, Peer Support for Academic Work, Safety & Social-Emotional). The sub-sections P.S. 8 M will place particular focus on during the 2018-2019 school year will be Peer Support for Academic Work (-8% compared to the District average & -6% compared to the City average) and Social-Emotional (-10% compared to the District average & -11% compared to the City average). In order to address the concerns expressed by the school community in the 2017-2018 School Quality Guide, P.S. 8 will continue to have on staff a Student Support Coordinator that will provide counseling services to at-risk students as well as provide professional learning sessions to teachers and parents on how to best support our students' social-emotional development. In addition, a full time guidance counselor is on staff to provide counseling services to both mandated and at-risk students. Additionally, P.S. 8 Manhattan will continue its partnership with Turn 2 Us from New York Presbyterian Hospital. This program provides both individual and group services to our students and families that promote mental health and academic success. Also, Turn 2 Us facilitates workshops to parents and teachers on strategies that best supports our students' social, emotional and academic development. In addition, the Caring at Columbia organization will continue to facilitate a drama club for our grade 4 at-risk students. 2  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 06M008 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 0K,01,02,03,04,05 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 532 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language YES Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 28 28 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 17 8 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 97.0% % Attendance Rate 94.4% % Reduced Lunch 37.8% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.0% 95.7% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 1.9% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 3.78 0% 14% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 26.0% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 77% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes No Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A NO N/A NO NO Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A YSH N/A NO YSH Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A NO N/A N/A NO High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 39 39 93.4% 1.9% 19.7% 2.3% 0.2% 0.0% 4 0% 5.5 45.6% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No N/A N/A N/A NO NO N/A N/A N/A YSH YSH N/A N/A N/A YES YES N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 3  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. English Language Arts (ELA) Public School 8 Manhattan saw a 20 point decrease in third grade Level 1 students from 45% to 25% and a 10 point increase in level 2 students from 33% in 2017 to 43% in 2018. The percentage of third grade students achieving a Level 3 or 4 increased ten points from 22% in 2017 to 32% in 2018. The percentage of fourth grade students obtaining a Level 1 decreased from 42% to 25%. The percentage of fourth grade students attaining a Level 2 increased by three points from 43% in 2017 to 46% in 2018. The percentage of students achieving a Level 3 or 4 increased by fourteen points from 16% in 2017 to 30% in 2018. The percentage of fifth grade students obtaining a Level 1 decreased by 7 points from 49% in 2017 to 42% in 2018. The percentage of students attaining a Level 2 increased from 35% to 42%. There was a one point increase in students achieving a Level 3 or 4 from 16% in 2017 to 17% in 2018. As evidenced by the 2018 New York State English Language Arts (ELA) assessment, the percentage of third to fifth grade students obtaining a Level 1 decreased by 14 points from 45% in 2017 to 35% in 2018. The percentage of students attaining a Level 2 increased by 6 points from 37% in 2017 to 43% in 2018. The percentage of students achieving a Level 3 or 4 increased by 8 points from 18% in 2017 to 26% in 2018. Currently, according to the September 2018 STAR Reading assessment results, the proficiency levels of our third to fifth grade students are as follows: Grade Level 1 Level 2 Level 3 Level 4 3rd 4th 5th 54% 62% 37% TOTAL 52% 29% 29% 43% 33% 17% 10% 14% 13% 0% 0% 6% 2% 4  MATHEMATICS Public School 8 Manhattan saw a 7 point decrease in third grade Level 1 students from 30% to 23% and a 21 point decrease in level 2 students from 41% in 2017 to 19% in 2018. The percentage of third grade students achieving a Level 3 or 4 increased 29 points from 29% in 2017 to 58% in 2018. The percentage of fourth grade students obtaining a Level 1 decreased from 40% to 24%. The percentage of fourth grade students attaining a Level 2 decreased by twelve points from 44% in 2017 to 32% in 2018. The percentage of students achieving a Level 3 or 4 increased by 28 points from 16% in 2017 to 44% in 2018. The percentage of fifth grade students obtaining a Level 1 decreased by 15 points from 47% in 2017 to 32% in 2018. The percentage of students attaining a Level 2 increased from 20% to 33%. There was a two point increase in students achieving a Level 3 or 4 from 33% in 2017 to 35% in 2018. As evidenced by the 2018 New York State Mathematics assessment, the percentage of third to fifth grade students obtaining a Level 1 decreased by 13 points from 40% in 2017 to 27% in 2018. The percentage of students attaining a Level 2 decreased by 6 points from 34% in 2017 to 28% in 2018. The percentage of students achieving a Level 3 or 4 increased by 20 points from 26% in 2017 to 46% in 2018. As evidenced by the September 2018 STAR Math assessment, our third to fifth grade students proficiency levels in mathematics are as follows: Grade Level 1 Level 2 Level 3 Level 4 3rd 4th 5th 39% 43% 51% TOTAL 44% 35% 40% 23% 33% 15% 11% 21% 15% 11% 6% 5% 8% As a tool to monitor students’ academic progress, Public School 8 Manhattan will continue to utilize the STAR Reading and Math assessment. As a result of this data, the ENL instructors, the instructional coaches, and the Cabinet will continue to facilitate intervention groups targeting Levels 1 and 2 students in both ELA and mathematics during the 2018-2019 school year. In addition, a February and April Academic Academy that will focus on both ELA and mathematics, will be created to assist in the reduction of Levels 1 and 2 students and increase the percentage of Levels 3 and 4 students. Lastly, our two literacy and mathematics coaches will be facilitating professional learning sessions to all teachers. The professional learning sessions will continue to focus on the balanced literacy components (guided reading, shared reading, read aloud with higher order questions, word study, etc.), writing and CGI for grades 3-5 and Number Talks for grades K-2. NYSESLAT/ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS (ELLs) 5  As of October 2018, 41.0% or 206 students at Public School 8 Manhattan are classified as English language learners (ELLs). The 2017 NYSESLAT results are as follows: 2018 NYSESLAT Results By Grade and Proficiency Levels Grade Entering Emerging Transitioning Expanding Commanding Sept. June Sept. June Sept. June Sept. June Sept. June 14 9 3 4 1 3 8 K 1st 6 2nd 2 3rd 2 4th 3 5th 3 Total 34 12 28 24 3 4 1 2 1 1 8 6 0 7 3 4 9 10 13 6 6 7 51 10 12 9 11 1 4 47 11 18 18 20 18 15 14 11 11 8 19 24 91 96 3 1 17 8 11 3 43 P.S. 8 Manhattan’s ELL Students’ Progress in the 2018 NYSESLAT Assessment No. of Ss that remained on the No. of Ss that levels or more No. of Ss that progressed 2 same level progressed 1 level 12 22 21 13 8 24 100 14 11 13 11 11 6 66 11 4 0 4 1 3 23 Grade K 1st 2nd 3rd 4th 5th Total No. of Ss that regressed 5 5 0 3 1 1 15  Of the 100 students that remained on the same proficiency level, 41 students showed progress within the  level. In total, 130 out of 204 (64%) English language learners demonstrated progress in the 2018 NYSESLAT assessment.  Of the 42 SWD students tested, 18 students increased one or more proficiency levels, 23 students remained at the same level and 2 students regressed. Public School 8 Manhattan's Total ELL Population by Grade and Language Proficiency Level for the 2018-2019 School Year Grade Entering Emergent Transitioning Expanding Former ELLs Total K 1 5 7 4 10 4 7 13 17 0 26 41 6  2 3 4 5 6 8 3 4 4 2 1 1 Total 33 22 15 7 11 3 47 19 15 9 7 80 1 11 4 8 24 45 43 28 23 206 In order to support our ELLs English language development, P.S 8 M has one bilingual/ENL coordinator and one out of classroom ENL teacher that both pushes in and pulls out students from monolingual classrooms. Additionally, the school also employs three classroom teachers with ENL certificates. Lastly, our dual language program (English/Spanish) serves ELL students in grades K-5. Public School 8 Manhattan will continue the Title III program for all grades 2-5 English language learners beginning in October 2018. This program provides students with small group literacy and mathematics instruction, utilizing ENL strategies. Additionally, the bilingual-ENL coordinator will facilitate professional learning sessions for teachers on integrating ENL methodologies into their classroom instruction. In addition, all English language learners will be invited to attend the February and April Academic Academies. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, the percentage of third to fifth grade students attaining a Level 1 in mathematics will decrease by at least 10 points as evidenced by the 2019 NYS Mathematics Assessment. 7  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Classroom schedules have been rearranged to allow for math instruction to occur in the morning three times a week (Mondays, Wednesdays, & Fridays). Creating a Math Coach position to provide teachers support in analyzing students’ work, planning tiered and differentiated math lessons, modeling best practices, and executing engaging, rigorous mathematics instruction Providing Math professional learning for classroom teachers through Metamorphosis Math. Pre-K to 5th Grade Pre-K to 5th Grade Sept. 2018 to June 2019 Sept. 2018 to June 2019 Administration and Teachers Math Coach and Administration Grades 3-5 Oct. 2018 to June 2019 (6 sessions) Math Coach and 1 classroom teacher Continue to embed “Number Talks” into the daily math routine in grades K to 2 classrooms. This activity has proved to increase students’ mental math capacity. K to 2nd Grade Sept. 2018 to June 2019 Implementing Cognitively Guided Instruction (CGI) daily in all classrooms. Implementing small, guided intervention math groups once a week that targets students’ individual needs in grades K-5 classrooms ("Guided Fridays"). K to 5th Grade K to 5th Grade Sept. 2018 to June 2019 Sept. 2018 to June 2019 Weekly quizzes on Fridays ("Frizzes") that will assess students' mastery of the standards addressed during the week. 3rd to 5th Grade Sept 2018 to June 2019 Math and ELA intervention groups, facilitated by members of the Cabinet, targeting Level 1 and 2 students, three times a week. 3rd to 5th Grade Oct. 2018 to June 2019 Math Academy ("Math Boot Camp"), targeting Level 1 and 2 students, that engages participants in activities that addresses those Standards students are struggling with, as evidenced by the Mock Mathematics Test administered in February 2019 and classroom data (i.e, STAR Math, "Frizzes", etc.). 3rd to 5th Grade April 2019 Math Consultant;Math Coach; Teachers and Administration Math Coach; Teachers and Administration Math Coach; Teachers and Administration Math Coach; Teachers and Administration Administration, Instructional Coaches, Administration, Mathematics Instructional Coach and Teachers Title III Saturday Academy targeting English language learners. During the program, students will engage in one hour of mathematics instruction. Activities will address those Standards students are struggling with, as evidenced by classroom data (i.e., STAR Math, "Frizzes", etc.) and the Mock Mathematics Test. 2nd to 5th Grade Oct. 2018 to Dec. 2019 & March 2019 to May 2019 Administration, Bilingual/ENL Coordinator, Mathematics Coach 8 Students will engage in a half an hour of math test sophistication instruction in their classrooms. Activities will address those Standards students are struggling with, as evidenced by the Mock Mathematics Test and classroom data (i.e, STAR Math, "Frizzes", etc.) and Title III Saturday Academy Teachers 3rd to 5th Grade February 2019 to May 2019 Administration, Mathematics Coach and Teachers 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. In collaboration with Children’s Aid, the Public School 8 Manhattan parent community will be offered a series of workshops, facilitated by the mathematics instructional coach and the administrative team. These workshops will be conducted once a month from September 2018 to June 2019. Our goal is to show our parents strategies that they can utilize at home that will positively promote their children's academic and social-emotional development. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. In collaboration with Children’s Aid, the PS 8 parent community and student population are provided with the following:  GoMath curriculum--- Common Core aligned math program.  Readjusting the teachers’ schedules so that Math instruction occurs in the beginning of the instructional day  three times a week (Mondays, Wednesdays, and Fridays). Sustaining a math coach position to support teachers in analyzing students’ work, identifying best practices, and integrating best practices into daily instruction.  After School Extended Day Program that supports our students with academic enrichment and supplemental instructional tutoring, Homework Help, arts, recreation, socialization, and leadership activities.  A Preventive Services Program that provides supportive services in parenting skills, reducing the risk of child abuse, neglect and domestic violence prevention assistance.  Partnership with the City Connect program, which provides intervention, prevention, and enrichment services that facilitates the social and emotional needs of students and families in grades K-3.  Partnership with the ‘Turn 2 Us’ program, which provides intervention, prevention, and enrichment services that facilitates the social and emotional needs of students and families in grades Pre K to 5.  The SAPIS Program where the SAPIS worker provides violence and drug prevention and intervention services to the students at P.S. 8M. These prevention services include, but are not limited to: individual, group, family, and crisis counseling, classroom presentations, social skills groups, and, if necessary, referrals for professional services outside the school.  Early Head Start, Head Start and Pre-K services are also provided for our school community.  A Title III Program, federally funded supplemental service, is provided to our ELL population once a week for four hours. This program will focus on increasing the participating students’ English language and mathematics proficiency through small group instruction. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA X Immigrant Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A 9  C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind X Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, P.S. 8 Manhattan will administer the third STAR Math assessment where at least 83% of our third to fifth grade students will achieve a minimum of a Level 2, as evidenced by the STAR Math Test. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) STAR Math assessments. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 0  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? The percentage of Level 3 to Level 5 occurrences decreased by 33% from 57 during the 2016-2017 school year to 38 during the 2017-2018 school year, as evidenced by OORS. Public School 8 Manhattan's 2017-2018 School Quality Guide indicates that Public School 8 Manhattan received a Survey Element Score of 2.93 in Supportive Environment. Specifically, 35% of teachers responded that our students do not behave well in class even when the teacher isn't watching. In addition, 33% of the teachers surveyed stated that they do not feel that they have access to school based supports that will assist them in handling behavioral/emotional escalations. Supportive Environment will continue to be Public School 8 Manhattan's focus during the 2018-2019 school year--- specifically in the sub-sections of Peer Support for Academic Work (-8% compared to the District average & -6% compared to the City average) and Social-Emotional (-10% compared to the District average & -11% compared to the City average). Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, the percentage of Level 3 to Level 5 occurrences at Public School 8 Manhattan will decrease by 25% when compared to June 2018, as evidenced by OORS. 1  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Student Resource Coordinator will focus on our K to 3rd grade population, which has a high concentration of ELLs and SWDs. Students will be referred for further internal and external support based on teacher observations and agency assessments. K to 3rd Graders Pre-K through 5th Graders, Teachers, & Parents New York Presbyterian Hospital, through the Derek Jeter ‘Turn 2 Us' program, is supporting Pre-K through 2nd graders with In-Class Mindfulness Exercises (ICME) for self-management. The fourth and fifth grade classes are receiving sports programming as well as the “Caring at Columbia” drama program. The sports group will be diversified with students who perform well in addition to students with behavior/emotional issues. The drama group will target students that tend to slip through the cracks because they are quiet or introverted – healthy self-expression is the goal. Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Sept. 2018 through June 2019 Sept. 2018 through June 2019 Children’s Aid New York Presbyterian Hospital, Turn 2 Us, & Caring at Columbia Teachers will receive support for identifying student mental, social, and emotional needs; strategies to use in the classrooms to create a supportive environment; as well as strategies for maintaining their own mental health in challenging situations. Parent workshops will be held in an effort to provide them with strategies they can implement at home when having mental, social, and/or emotional difficulties with their children. Our Student Support Coordinator will continue to provide TCIS training for teachers and social-emotional learning support for all students as needed. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement All Staff and Students Sept. 2018 - June 2019 Student Support Coordinator 2  How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. In collaboration with Children’s Aid, workshops facilitated by the Student Support Coordinator, Turn 2 Us Foundation and the administrative team will be offered to Public School 8 Manhattan parents. Workshops will held, at a minimum once a month, either during the school day or during the parental engagement time (Tuesdays from 2:20 p.m. to 3:00 p.m.). These workshops will provide parents with strategies and information that promotes our students' positive social, emotional and academic development. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. In collaboration with Children’s Aid, the PS 8 parent community and student population are provided with the following:  Creating a Student Support Coordinator position, The coordinator will provide counseling sessions to at-risk students in individual and small group settings--- promoting positive social, emotional and academic development.  After School Extended Day Program that supports our students with academic enrichment and supplemental instructional tutoring, Homework Help, arts, recreation, socialization, and leadership activities.  A Preventive Services Program that provides supportive services in parenting skills, reducing the risk of child abuse, neglect and domestic violence prevention assistance.  Partnership with the City Connect program, which provides intervention, prevention, and enrichment services that facilitates the social and emotional needs of students and families in grades K-3.  Partnership with the ‘Turn 2 Us’ program, which provides intervention, prevention, and enrichment services that facilitates the social and emotional needs of students and families in grades Pre K to 5.  The SAPIS Program where the SAPIS worker provides violence and drug prevention and intervention services to the students at P.S. 8M. These prevention services include, but are not limited to: individual, group, family, and crisis counseling, classroom presentations, social skills groups, and, if necessary, referrals for professional services outside the school.  Early Head Start, Head Start and Pre-K services are also provided for our school community. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA X Title II, Part A SIG PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, Public School 8 Manhattan will have 25% fewer Level 3 to Level 5 occurrences, as compared to the same time period during the 2017-2018 school year, as measured by the OORS reports. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. OORS reports Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 3  4  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Public School 8 Manhattan's 2017-2018 NYC School Quality Guide indicates a Survey Element Score of 3.40 in the Collaborative Teachers element, a .05 point decrease from the 2016-2017 school year. Although 91% of teachers responded that their professional development experiences last year have been sustained and coherent, 22% of teachers stated that their colleagues did not make a conscious effort to coordinate their teaching with instruction at other grade levels (vertical planning). Additionally, fourteen percent (14%) of teachers disagree that the principal, teachers, and staff collaborate in order to ensure that the school runs effectively; the same as when compared to the 2016-2017 school year. Lastly, 67% of teachers responded that a lot or all of the teachers at their school help maintain discipline in the entire school, not just in their classroom. This is a fourteen percentage point increase when compared to the 2016-2017 school year. In addition, Public School 8 Manhattan saw a 8% increase in third to fifth grade students achieving proficiency on the 2018 NYS ELA assessment from 18% in 2017 to 26% in 2018. However, 31% of our testers scored a Level 1 and 43% scored a Level 2. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, through increased opportunities for teachers to collaboratively participate in horizontal and vertical professional learning/planning sessions in literacy instruction, the percentage of third to fifth grade students attaining a level 1 in ELA will decrease by at least 10 points as evidenced by the 2019 NYS ELA assessment. 5 Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Principal, Assistant Principals, Instructional Coaches and Teachers Principal, Assistant Principals, Instructional Coaches and Teachers Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Creation of the Professional Learning Committee at Public School 8 Manhattan at will meet at least once a month. Its purpose is to establish a school-wide culture of learning, facilitate teacher leadership, and lead the implementation and monitoring of the professional learning plan. Members will design a survey to assess the needs and wants of the staff to create a living professional development plan that can meet the needs of the PS8 staff. Examples of topics that will be addressed during the professional learning sessions being offered to the Public School 8 Manhattan staff during the 2017-2018 school year are: Differentiating Instruction for your ELLs, How to Write Quality IEPs and Planning High Quality Guided Reading Lessons to Struggling Readers. Eighty (80) minutes on Mondays and Thirty-Five (35) minutes on Tuesdays has been scheduled for teachers and teachers’ assistants to participate in professional learning. Additionally, two common preparation period has been built into teachers’ schedules--- teachers are permitted to use this time to engage in horizontal planning. The purpose of the horizontal team is to gather and review data, identify gaps, and plan focused tiered lessons that address the needs of all students, including English language learners and Students with Disabilities, in the classroom. All School staff Sept. 2018-June 2019 All Teachers and Teachers’ Assistants Mondays from 2:35 p.m. to 3:55 p.m. and Tuesdays from 3:15 p.m. to 3:50 p.m. Sept. 2018-June 2019 Common preparation periods occur one day a week Horizontal planning teams have been established at a minimum once a week with the purpose of analyzing data and adjusting lesson/unit plans. All Teachers Sept 2018 to June 2019 Principal, Assistant Principals, Instructional Coaches and Teachers 6  Vertical planning teams have been established with the purpose of building shared understandings and coherency among all Pre-K to Grade 5 teachers and teachers' assistants. Sept. 2018 to June 2019 All Teachers and Teachers' Assistants K-2 Universal Literacy Coach and Grades 3-5 Literacy coach scheduled to aid in the facilitation of horizontal and vertical planning sessions. Sept. 2018- June 2019 All Teachers and Teachers’ Assistants Outside professional learning sessions, such as Fundations, will be scheduled for all teachers to attend. Instructional coaches will assist teachers in the implementing of these best practices in the classroom. All Teachers and Teachers’ Assistants Sept. 2018- June 2019 Inter-visitations will be scheduled for teachers to observe and analyze best practices. Literacy coaches will facilitate sessions and assist Teachers in the implementing these best practices in the classroom. All Teachers Sept. 2018 to June 2019 Time lines and content of sessions adjusted and mapped out with teachers, the administrative team, and other support personnel, inclusive of Chancellor’s Instructional Expectations and the New Capacity Framework. All Teachers and Teachers’ Assistants Mid-Winter ELA Academy ("Mid-Winter ELA Boot Camp"), targeting Level 1 and 2 students, to engage participants in activities that addresses those Standards students are struggling with, as evidenced by the Mock ELA Test administered on January 31st and February 1st, 2018, and classroom data (i.e, STAR Reading, Performance Based Assessments (PBAs), etc.). Title III Saturday Academy targeting English language learners. During the program, students will engage in three hours of ELA instruction. Activities will address those Standards students are struggling with, as evidenced by classroom data (i.e., STAR Reading, On Demand Writing Tasks, etc.) and the Mock ELA Test (beginning in March 2018) 3rd to 5th Grade Students 2nd to 5th Grade Students Principal, Assistant Principals, Instructional Coaches, Teachers and Teachers' Assistants Principal, Assistant Principals, Literacy Coach, Universal Literacy Coach, Teachers, and Teachers’ Assistants Principal, Assistant Principals, Literacy Coach, Universal Literacy Coach, Teachers, and Teachers’ Assistants Principal, Assistant Principals, Literacy Coach, Teachers, and Teachers’ Assistants Principal, Assistant Principals, Instructional Coaches, Teachers and Teachers' Assistants Administration, Grades 3-5 Literacy Coach and Teachers Mondays from 2:35 p.m. to 3:55 p.m. and Tuesdays from 3:15 p.m. to 3:50 p.m. Sept. 2018– June 2019 February 2019 October 2018 to December 2018 and March 2019 to May 2019 Administration, Bilingual/ENL Coordinator, Grades 3-5 Literacy Coach and Title III Teachers 7 Students will engage in a half an hour of ELA test sophistication instruction in their classrooms. Activities will address those Standards students are struggling with, as evidenced by the ELA Test and classroom data (i.e., STAR Reading, On Demand Writing Tasks, etc.) Participation in the "Most Words Read" incentive program sponsored by the Carmel Hill Fund. Twice a year, this program recognizes the student who has read the most words in each grade (Kindergarten to Fifth). The goal is to motivate all students to read more and therefore increase all of our students' reading and writing levels. 3rd to 5th Grade Students February 2019 to April 2019 Administration, Grades 3-5 Literacy Coach and Teachers Grades K-5 Students January 2019 and June 2019 Administration, Universal Literacy Coach, Grades 3-5 Literacy Coach, Teachers and Representatives from the Carmel Hill Fund 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. In collaboration with Children’s Aid, the PS 8 parent community will be provided with workshops led by the literacy instructional coach and the administrative team on a monthly basis starting in October 2018. These workshops will provide parents with strategies that support their children's academic success. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. In collaboration with the Children’s Aid, the PS 8 parent community and student population are provided with the following:  Teacher's College Reading and Writing Curriculum--- Common Core aligned literacy program.  Sustaining a literacy coach position to support teachers in analyzing students’ work, identifying best practices, and integrating best practices into daily instruction.  After School Extended Day Program that supports our students with academic enrichment and supplemental instructional tutoring, Homework Help, arts, recreation, socialization, and leadership activities.  A Preventive Services Program that provides supportive services in parenting skills, reducing the risk of child abuse, neglect and domestic violence prevention assistance.  Partnership with the City Connect program, which provides intervention, prevention, and enrichment services that facilitates the social and emotional needs of students and families in grades K-3.  Partnership with the ‘Turn 2 Us’ program, which provides intervention, prevention, and enrichment services that facilitates the social and emotional needs of students and families in grades Pre K to 5.  The SAPIS Program where the SAPIS worker provides violence and drug prevention and intervention services to the students at P.S. 8M. These prevention services include, but are not limited to: individual, group, family, and crisis counseling, classroom presentations, social skills groups, and, if necessary, referrals for professional services outside the school.  Early Head Start, Head Start and Pre-K services are also provided for our school community.  A Title III Program, federally funded supplemental service, is provided to our ELL population once a week for four hours. This program will focus on increasing the participating students’ English language proficiency 8  through small group instruction targeting their development in the four language modalities--- speaking, listening, reading and writing. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA X Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A SIG PTA Funded In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, P.S. 8 Manhattan will administer the third STAR Reading assessment where at least 75% of students in grades 3-5 will attain a minimum proficiency level of 2. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. STAR Reading assessment. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 9  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. As evidenced by the 2017-2018 School Quality Guide, Public School 8 Manhattan attained a Survey Element Score of 3.48, .49 points lower when compared to the 2016-2017 results. Although P.S. 8 M received 99% positive responses in the subsection of Inclusive Leadership (four percentage points greater than the District average and five percentage points greater than the City average); in the sub-section of Instructional Leadership, the school earned 79% positive responses, eight percentage points below the District average and nine percentage points below the City average. This sub-section (Instructional Leadership) will be an area of focus for the 2018-2019 school year. Public School 8 Manhattan's Instructional Focus is: Students will engage in common, on-going, and standards-based formative and summative assessments, which teachers will use to inform differentiated and rigorous instruction for all learners. In order to address this, professional learning sessions and professional conversations over the past two years have revolved predominantly around Domain 3 (Instruction) in the Danielson Framework; with a particular focus on Component 3d (Using Assessment in Instruction) When analyzing our school's Advance data, the amount of times teachers were rated effective or highly effective in Component 3d increased from 78.99% during the 2016-2017 school year to 82.02% in the 2017-2018 school year. This is an increase of 3.03%. In order to substain this growth, not only in Component 3d, but in all components within the Danielson Framework, Public School 8 Manhattan will continue to focus on nurturing the professional growth of staff members in order to ensure that instruction is tiered, engaging and aligned to the Common Core Standards. Also, Improvement of teacher effectiveness through frequent and actionable feedback to advance students’ academic achievement and support their social and emotional needs will continue to be a priority for this academic year. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, there will be a five (5) percentage point increase in the number of teachers rated Effective/Highly Effective in Domain 3D -Using Assessment In Instruction, as measured by the HEDI scale average on individual MOTP summary outcomes. 0  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Attend further training regarding implementation of the Danielson Framework for Teaching and the Advance system to conduct informal and formal observations to ensure consistency of practice and feedback. Principal and Assistant Principals October 2018 to June 2019 Teachers engage in cycles of self-assessments on the eight components (1a, 1e, 2a, 2d, 3b, 3c, 3d, 4e) of the Danielson Framework for Teaching, and identify at least one area for growth. Teachers Sept. 2018 to June 2019 October 2018 to June 2019 August 2018 to June 2019 Sept. 2018 to June 2019 Verbal and written feedback given to teachers will improve teachers’ practice and therefore lead to academic growth and support our students’ social/emotional development. Teachers Principal, Assistant Principals, Literacy Coach, Mathematics Coach Teachers Schedule regular administrative meetings twice a month to collaboratively share feedback so as to build consensus of understanding, as well as consistency and clarity in expectations for teacher practice, guided by the Danielson Framework for Teaching. Engage teachers in professional learning sessions related to Danielson Component 3d, Using Assessment in Instruction. These sessions will take place during Mondays' Professional Learning Time (2:20 p.m. to 3:40 p.m.), Tuesdays' Other Professional Time (3:00 p.m. to 3:35 p.m.), common planning meetings (twice a week) and during Professional Learning Days (November 2017 and June 2018). In addition, inter-visitations, both in school and out of school, will be scheduled for teachers to observe best practices in relation to Component 3d. Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Principal and Assistant Principals attend training at the DOE level, webinar offered by DOE and Teacher Development Effectiveness Coach (TDEC) on-site training Classroom Teachers, Out of Classroom Personnel, Assistant Principals and Principal Principal and Assistant Principals Cabinet Members consisting of Principal, Assistant Principals, Literacy Coach, Math Coach, and CAS Director Cabinet Members consisting of Principal, Assistant Principals, Literacy Coach, Math Coach, and CAS Director Participate in weekly horizontal and vertical planning teams to establish clear instructional goals, track students’ academic progress, and ensure consistency in curriculum, instruction, and Principal and Assistant Principals Sept. 2018 to June 2019 Teachers, Teachers’ Assistants, RTI Coordinator, 1 learning materials among teachers. Emphasis will be placed on adjusting instruction and developing strategies that addresses the needs of our high need student subgroups, such as Students with Disabilities and English Language Learners. Literacy Coach, Mathematics Coach, Assistant Principals, Principal Establish a MOSL training committee consisting of teachers that will train the staff and oversee the scoring process, thus increasing the number and capacity of teacher leaders at the school. One Classroom Teacher from each grade October 2018 to May 2019 Classroom Teachers (one per grade) and Administration Launch a Professional Learning Team consisting of teachers and administrators whose purpose is to establish a school-wide culture of learning, facilitate teacher leadership, and implement and monitor the professional learning plan. All teachers Sept. 2018 to June 2019 Classroom Teachers, Literacy Coach, Mathematics Coach, Assistant Principals, and Principal 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. In collaboration with Children’s Aid and members of Cabinet, the PS 8 Manhattan parent community will be offered workshops on how to provide quality feedback and engage their children in self assessment when completing assignments at home. In addition, teachers and instructional coaches will facilitate workshops for parents on how their children will be assessed daily during the instructional day. Rubrics and checklists being utilized during instruction will be discussed during these parent meetings. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. In collaboration with Children’s Aid, the PS 8 parent community and student population are provided with the following:  Teacher's College Reading and Writing Curriculum and GoMath!--- Common Core aligned literacy and math programs.  Readjusting the teachers’ schedules so that Math instruction occurs in the beginning of the instructional day  three times a week (Mondays, Wednesdays, and Fridays). Sustaining a math coach position and two literacy coach positions to support teachers in analyzing students’ work, identifying best practices, and integrating best practices into daily instruction.  Partnership with the ‘Turn 2 Us’ program, which facilitates professional learning sessions for our teachers in best practices that support our students' social-emotional needs. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA X Title II, Part A SIG PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other 2  Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, 85% of Public School 8 Manhattan teachers will have achieved an Effective or Highly Effective rating in component 3D as evidenced by the HEDI Teacher Summary Outcomes report. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. The Advance teacher development and evaluation system. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 3  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. As evidenced in 2017-2018 School Quality Guide, PS 8 M received a Survey Element Score of 3.87 in Strong Family-Community Ties, a .49 point increase when compared to the 2016-2017 results . Additionally, the parent's survey response rate increased by 21 percentage points from 78% in 2016-2017 to 99% in 2017-2018. However, in the sub-section of Parent Involvement in School, Public School 8 Manhattan received 90% positive responses, one percentage point below the District average. This will be a priority area within this element during the 2018-2019 school year. The majority of the parental School Environment Surveys are completed during the Spring Parent-Teacher Conferences. There was an increase in the percentage of parents attending these meetings during the 2017-2018 school year. In addition, other opportunities for parents to complete the survey were offered. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, the percentage of positive responses in the Strong Family-Community Ties: Parent Involvement in School component of the School Quality Guide will increase from 90% to 93%. 4  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs,  professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Effective partnership with parents to support student learning will be established through written communications with caregivers. Teachers will work on newsletters, notes and feedback on student’s notebooks during Parental Engagement Time. Parents/ Guardians Four Parent Conference Nights will be organized for parents to learn about school-wide expectations, school-wide regulations, and their children’s academic and social emotional development. Parents/ Guardians Parents/ Guardians Parents/ Guardians As per CR Part 154.2, teachers of ELLs will meet individually with parents to discuss students’ goals, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas. Open School Week will be utilized as a tool to establish strong working relationships between Teachers and Parents. Parents will be invited to learn about the grade level expectations for their children, as well as, to answer any questions they may have around instruction and classroom routines. PS 8M is a Children’s Aid Society community school and thus parents are provided with opportunities to partake in various workshops on a variety of topics such as stress management, child development and family life. In addition our Parent Coordinator will work closely with the PTA in order to provide opportunities for adult learning. Title III monies have been allocated for workshops tailored to parents of ELLs. These workshops will show parents how to support their ELL children academically and social-emotionally. The Parent Teacher Association Executive Members attend workshops that are geared to increase parent involvement in our school. These workshops are designed to build strong Parents Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Teachers Sept. 2018 to June 2019 Administration and Teachers Administration, Bilingual Coordinator and Teachers of ELL Students Administration and teachers Sept. 2018, November 2018, March 2019, and May 2019 Sept. 2018 to May 2019 November 12, 2018 to November 16, 2018 Parents/ Guardians Sept. 2018 to June 2019 Administration, CBO and Parent Coordinator Parents/Guardians of ELLs January 2019 to May 2019 Sept. 2018 to June 2019 Administration, Parent Coordinator, and Title III Parent Liasion PTA Executive Members 5  family-community ties and to involve parents in their child’s education. For example: Ramapo for Learning:  Parents as Leaders workshop--- addresses skills and ideas for advocating effectively for their child’s needs in their school and community.  Techniques for communicating with children who learn differently by using visuals, non-verbal cues, and step by step instruction. UFT Manhattan Parent Leader Conference:  Nurturing your child’s love of reading.  Common Core workshop  Communication and Public Speaking  Skills for Parents The Campaign for Educational Equity (Teachers’ College, Columbia University):  Know your children’s educational rights District 6 PA, PTA, PC:  Working Together in Promoting Parent Engagement/ Fostering Student Success City Connects will focus on our K to 3rd grade population, which has a high concentration of ELLs and SWDs. Parents will be referred for further internal and external support for their children based on teacher observations and agency assessments. New York Presbyterian Hospital, through the Derek Jeter ‘Turn 2 Us' program, is facilitating parent workshops in an effort to provide them with strategies they can implement at home when having mental, social, and/or emotional difficulties with their children. Creation of a Student Support Coordinator position. The Coordinator will provide TCIS training for teachers and social-emotional learning support for all students and their families as needed. The Parent Coordinator position will continue to assist parents/guardians in supporting their children both academically and social-emotionally. In addition, the Parent Coordinator will afford families multiple opportunities to volunteer in daily events at our school. K to 3rd Graders Sept. 2018 to June 2019 Children's Aid Society and City Connects Pre-K through 5th Graders, Teachers, & Parents Sept. 2018 to June 2019 New York Presbyterian Hospital, Turn 2 Us, & Columbia Cares All Staff and Students Sept. 2018 to June 2019 Dean of Student Support Parent Coordinator and Parents Sept. 2018 to June 2019 Parent Coordinator 6  3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. In collaboration with Children’s Aid, the PS 8 parent community are provided with the following:  Workshops led by the Dean of Student Support, Turn 2 Us and the administrative team will be offered to parents. These workshops will provide parents with strategies they can utilize at home in order to support their children's academic success.  A Family Resource Center that provides parents with assistance in job counseling, housing, legal aid, computer workshops, and family budgeting.  An Adult Learning Program that offers workshops on ENL, family life, nutrition, EPIC (Every Person Influences Children) program, and arts & crafts. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. In collaboration with Children’s Aid, the PS 8 parent community and student population are provided with the following:  After School Extended Day Program that supports our students with academic enrichment and supplemental instructional tutoring, Homework Help, arts, recreation, socialization, and leadership activities.  Workshops facilitated by the instructional coaches are offered twice a month for parents (in the areas of literacy and mathematics). Examples of topics discussed during the workshops: Overview of the Curriculum and How to Best Support Your Child Academically.  A Preventive Services Program that provides supportive services in parenting skills, reducing the risk of child  abuse, neglect and domestic violence prevention assistance. Student Resource Coordinator provides intervention, prevention, and enrichment services that facilitates the social and emotional needs of students and families in grades K-3.  Partnership with the ‘Turn 2 Us’ program, which provides intervention, prevention, and enrichment services that facilitates the social and emotional needs of students and families in grades Pre K to 5.  The SAPIS Program where the SAPIS worker provides violence and drug prevention and intervention services to the students at P.S. 8M. These prevention services include, but are not limited to: individual, group, family, and crisis counseling, classroom presentations, social skills groups, and, if necessary, referrals for professional services outside the school.  Early Head Start, Head Start and Pre-K services are also provided for our school community.  A Title III Program, federally funded supplemental service, is provided to our ELL population once a week for four hours. This program also offers workshops for parents to English language learners on how to best support their children academically at home. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG X X Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 7  The parental attendance rate at all school run parent workshops will increase by 20% compared to the 2017-2018 school year, as evidenced by the 2018-2019 school year parent workshop attendance sheets. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Parent workshop attendance sheets. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 8  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) All holdovers in grades 3-5 (holdovers due to academic needs in literacy) Level 1 students based on NYS test scores Bottom 1/3 of second grade students as per the SEL data At-risk K and 1st grade students as per SEL New immigrants in grades 2-5 Teacher/Supervisor or CST referred Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) Fundations Wilson Writing Revolution 1:1 Conferencing Readers' Theater Successful Reader Accelerated Reader English In A Flash Identified students in grades K-5 receive intervention services in accordance to their needs as evidenced by assessment data results. Students identified in either the Tier II or Tier III level of intervention are served, in small groups, by highly qualified teachers using both a push-in and pull-out model of instruction. Shared Reading When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) All efforts are made to implement small group instruction during the literacy block for students in grades 1-5. This supports differentiated instruction for all Tier I and Tier II students. We will also offer a winter break program to prepare students for the NYS ELA test. Guided Reading Close Reading Read Aloud Interactive Writing Literacy Proficiency Kits Supporting Literacy Games Math in a Flash STAR Math Mathematics All holdovers in grades 3-5 (holdovers due to academic Identified students in grades 3-5 will receive interventionservices in accordance to their All efforts are made to implement small group instruction during the mathematics block. 9  Science needs in mathematics) Supporting Math Games Bottom 1/3 of second grade students as per the STAR Math data Level 1 students based on NYS test scores Teacher/Supervisor or CST referred All holdovers in grades 3-5 (holdovers due to academic needs in literacy) Language Proficiency Kit Guided Reading Teacher referred Shared Reading Close Reading Read Aloud Science Kits Technology Content Area Readers Guided Reading Shared Reading Close Reading Social Studies Social Studies All holdovers in grades 3-5 (holdovers due to academic needs in literacy) Teacher referred Read Aloud Technology Content Area Readers At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, Teachers/Supervisor referrals Individual and Small Group Counseling needs as evidenced by assessment data results. Students identified in either the Tier II or Tier III level of intervention are served, in small groups, by highly qualified teachers using both a push-in and pull-out model of instruction. Identified students in grades 3-5 will receive RTI services in accordance to their needs as evidenced by assessment data results. Students identified in either Tier II or Tier III level of intervention are served, in small groups, by highly qualified teachers using both a push-in and pull-out model of instruction. Identified students in grades 3-5 will receive RTI services in accordance to their needs as evidenced by assessment data results. Students identified in either the Tier II or Tier III level of intervention are served, in small groups, by highly qualified teachers using both a push-in and pull-out model of instruction. Guidance counselor provides individual and small group counseling to This supports differentiated instruction for all Tier I and Tier II students. We will also offer a spring break program to prepare students for the NYS Mathematics test. All efforts are made to implement small group instruction during the science period for students in grades 3-5. This supports differentiated instruction for all Tier I and Tier II students. All efforts are made to implement small group instruction during the social studies period for students in grades 3-5. This supports differentiated instruction for all Tier I and Tier II students. Through individual and small group counseling during the school day, the 0  School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Behavior Modification Strategies Teaching Children Coping Mechanisms Play Therapy Games Dramatizations students receive a therapeutic intervention program that supports self-esteem and coping mechanisms and behavior modification strategies. students in grades PreK-5 that have been identified as having emotional and social issues. Through play therapy, games and dramatizations, students will be able to discuss their concerns and work out their problems. TheStudent Support Coordinator provides counseling services in grades PreK-5 to students demonstrating patterns of social and behavioral misconduct as well as anxiety or sadness. Working closely with the family and classroom teacher is part of the process used to support the student. Children's Aid Society (CAS) Social Worker (MSW) will provide individual and group counseling to students as needed. Turn 2 Us Program will provide comprehensive training to staff, parents and students on strategies to cope with behaviors that impede socialization and academic growth. 1  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) We have 49 students in temporary housing or who are doubled up. 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. We provide school uniforms and school supplies for our STH population. Additionally, our guidance counselor and Dean of Student Support provide at-risk services to our Students in Temporary Housing. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2  N/A 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. N/A 3  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. Strategies and activities Public School 8 utilizes to recruit, retain and support high-quality, highly qualified teachers are as follows:  A hiring committee comprised of teachers and administrators will be formed to interview potential candidates. Questions and scenarios presented are tailored to positions that need to be filled. Interviews are conducted at the end of the school year or during the summer months with members of the hiring committee that are available.  The week before the beginning of the school year, new teachers are invited to come in and take a tour of the school, meet co-workers, review the school's handbook and Chancellor's Regulations, look over the Danielson Framework for Teaching and Learning and participate in professional learning sessions focused on instructional practice and classroom management. Instructional coaches work closely with new teachers to set up classrooms and ensure that they are familiar with the curriculum and instructional materials.   Two common planning periods are scheduled every week for new teachers to plan and work with colleagues and instructional coaches.  All new teachers are assigned a mentor that will work with them for two periods a week.  During the Initial Planning Conferences (IPC) for new teachers, conducted by the school's principal, the school-wide expectations are reviewed and an individualized professional learning plan is initially developed based on the needs that were determined during the meeting.  A Professional learning needs assessment is administered to all teachers to help determine areas of needs and strengths.  Teachers preparing portfolios for tenure will receive additional support from instructional coaches in providing evidence of effective instructional practice, positive students' outcomes and professional contributions to the school. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). 4   All teachers engage in professional learning sessions centered around Common Core Standards and  Instructional Shifts. Teachers are provided with concrete examples of what Common Core literacy and mathematics look like in daily instructional planning and practice. In the beginning of the school year, teachers engage in a Self Evaluation on the eight components (1a, 1e, 2a, 2d, 3b, 3c, 3d, 4e) of the Danielson Framework for Teaching. The data gathered is utilized by the administration and the professional learning team when developing professional learning sessions.  Teachers complete a professional learning needs assessment survey in the beginning of the school year. The data gathered is utilized by the administration and the professional learning team when developing professional learning sessions.  Teachers engage in horizontal and vertical professional learning sessions on how to adjust instruction to best serve the needs of their students, especially English language learners and Students with Disabilities. Particular focus will be given to ensuring that the balanced literacy framework is being implemented during the literacy block.  Horizontal and vertical planning sessions in literacy & math, using the Core Curriculum, are ongoing throughout the school year.  Ongoing Literacy/Math coaching in classrooms. Opportunities for inter-visitations are offered throughout the school year.  PreK-5 classroom teachers and support personnel engage in mapping out the Units of Study. Teachers look at end of unit performance tasks in order to determine the skills and Common Core Standards being assessed. Teachers adjust lessons according to students’ needs.  Ongoing professional learning sessions based on the Danielson Framework for Teaching are provided to teachers. Examples of professional learning sessions offered to teachers during the 2018-2019 school year: Developing High Quality Questions and Rigorous Tasks, Developing Assessments, and Using Data to Inform Instruction, IEP teacher plans and facilitate professional learning sessions for paraprofessionals on how to best serve individual and small group of students in achieving the Common Core Standards.   The Principal and Assistant Principals attend monthly professional learning sessions facilitated by the Superintendent and the District staff.  The administration attends Professional learning sessions facilitated by the Executive Leadership Institute (ELI).  The Professional Learning Plan is revised on an ongoing basis by the Professional Learning Team. Data gathered and analyzed by students' outcomes and Advance are utilized when determining the effectiveness and revising our school-based professional learning sessions. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A 5  Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). · We utilize Creative Curriculum and follow the Inspire track that contributes to our Pre-K students' emotional and social well-being and growth. · The Early Screening Inventory- Revised (ESI-R) is administered to screen individual students in order to determine if students may need early intervention services. The data derived from this assessment is utilized during the development of individualized instruction and student progress is monitored using the Work Sampling System throughout the school year. Parents receive results and the tools to support their children's growth at home and at school. · Ongoing home-school connections are ensured by the teachers, paraprofessionals, the family worker and the parent coordinator. Workshops focused on skills students need for kindergarten and strategies to support their children academically, socially and emotionally at home are offered. On a bi-monthly basis, a bilingual social worker provides ongoing support with workshops, outreach and referrals. · Our guidance staff and school based support team facilitates workshops and individual meetings with parents on expectations for kindergarten (both academic and social). Support is provided to parents as they initiate the process of obtaining early intervention services. · Opportunities for Pre-K teachers to engage in collaborative work with the kindergarten teachers are provided throughout the school year. Vertical team meetings and professional learning sessions allow teachers to work together and engage in professional conversations about curriculum and students' needs. · Teachers are responsible to maintain their students' records and are shared as students are promoted. Students' records allow new teachers that are working with these students to have an understanding of how they are as learners in all dimensions of growth and development. 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction.  Teachers are enlisted as members of the Measure of Student Learning Team (MOSL). This team determines  the appropriate school-wide assessment measures that will be utilized during the 2018-2019 school year. Instructional coaches meet twice a week with grade-level teams to review existing rubrics/checklists/templates and make adjustments to the assessment tools as necessary. 6   Teachers are given an opportunity in June to review and readjust our assessment plan to meet the needs of our student population.  Professional learning opportunities are offered on Mondays from 2:20-3:40, Tuesdays from 3:00-3:35 and twice a week during grade-level team meetings to analyze data gathered from the assessment tools being utilized and make adjustments to the curriculum as necessary. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used 7 Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 358,878.00 150,896.00 22,478.00 0.00 3,041,604.00 N/A N/a N/A N/A N/A Column B Section Reference(s) Sections 5A-5E Sections 5A-5E Section5A N/A Sections 5A-5E  conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 8  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. Luis Belliard School, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Public School 8 Manhattan will support parents and families of Title I students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students  providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology;  providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and  decision making in support of the education of their children; fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress;  providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments;  sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; and  providing professional development opportunities for school staff, with the assistance of parents, to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community. 9  Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will:  actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact;  engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills;  ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and  strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills;  maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home;   provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report;  host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; and conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help.    Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: 0   holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference;  hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year;  encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; providing individual conferences and small group workshops during Parental Engagement Time (Tuesdays from 2:20 p.m. to 3:00 p.m.) supporting or hosting Family Day events;   establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents;  encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers;  providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress;  developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; and  providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) School-Parent Compact (SPC) Public School 8 Manhattan, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; and ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA). Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships 1  ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff  ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents;  notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff  member; arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; and  planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences. I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by:     creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; 2   ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as  described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; and advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs. II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; and ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child. Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities 3  ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; and ● always try my best to learn. 4  Addendum: Community School Partnerships Directions: The Community School (CS) strategy is directly aligned to the Framework for Great Schools. Community Schools bring schools and community partners together and integrate academics, health, youth development, and family engagement to provide students with the tools and opportunities they need to succeed. The Core Services in Community Schools are Expanded Learning Time (ELT), Attendance Supports, Family Engagement, and Health & Wellness. Part 1 – Community School Partnerships Goal(s) How is the CS strategy integrated into academic instruction at your school, and what impact has it had on student academic outcomes? PS 8 The Luis Belliard School is a full service Community School in partnership with The Children’s Aid since 1996. The Community School strategy has been embedded at every level in order to afford children and families with educational enrichment opportunities, health and social emotional supports. Some examples of how the Community School strategy is integrated in the academic instruction are illustrated below:  The School Principal and Community School Director meet on a weekly basis in order to plan, coordinate and integrate academics, social emotional learning and student supports.  The Community School Director is an active member of the School Leadership Team, Cabinet and Safety Committee.  The Children’s Aid Social Worker and Student Resource Coordinator are members of the Child Study Team.  The Children’s Aid Student Resource Coordinator works with Teachers in grades K-3 in order to assess each child’s strengths and needs across four domains: Social/Emotional, Academic, Health and Family.Each child identified in the need category, are provided with a tailored set of intervention, prevention and enrichment services in the school or surrounding community.  The Social Worker and Youth Developers assess each after school program participant utilizing the Devereux Student Strengths Assessment (Mini DESSA) in order to identify student needs and provide necessary interventions and referrals for services.  The Educational Specialist provides Targeted Academic Intervention (TAI) in literacy to twenty students performing below the second grade benchmark. Students also receive services categorized as Urgent Intervention, or the Intervention categories in reading as measured by the SEL (Stars Early Literacy Assessment Test) and/or the DRA Assessment Tool administered in September  DOE Teachers and Children’s Aid Youth Developers provide remediation in ELA and Math for all after school participants in grades third through fifth for six weeks, twice a week for two hours a day, prior to the NYS ELA and Math Examinations. Indicate the summative goal(s) of the Community School for the 2018-19 school year. Be sure to construct the goal to be SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Realistic, and Time-bound. The goals of the CS for the 2018-2019 school year are:  The Resource Coordinator in collaboration with teachers and guidance will assess 100% of all students in grades K through 3. Students identified in the Need category will receive intervention plans mid-year and reassessed at the end of the year to gauge progress and/or continued need for services.  All third to fifth graders in the after school program will receive twelve remediation sessions in ELA and Math beginning in February.  100% of all students attending the after school program will receive academic enrichment, recreation, and social emotional learning from September 2018 to June 2019.  95% of all students attending the after school program will be assessed utilizing the Mini DESSA and tiered for intervention commencing on October 2018 Pre-test and May 2019 Post-test. Students identified in the Need category will receive action planning and intervention. 5  95% of Program participants receiving Targeted Academic Instruction (TAI) will sustain or improve their literacy skills as evidenced by the STARS, DRA and Rally! assessment tools Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Community School Annual Goal(s): How will achieving your Community School Goal(s)--in Expanded Learning Time (ELT), Attendance Supports, Family Engagement, and Health & Wellness--support your academic goals for students? Expanded Learning Time – All Program participants in the after school program receive academic enrichment in literary and math through the Kidzmath, Kidzscience and Kidzlit. The Kidz series are research-based academic enrichment curricula designed to develop youths reading motivation, capacity to read, thinking skills, and pro-social development in out of school time settings. Children are also provided with social-emotional learning instruction through the Mind UP curriculum, which is research-based and focused on improving behavior and self-regulation, build resilience to stress and promote a positive mind set. We also utilize the agency’s core values for after school programming, which fosters an environment of community building, focus, work hard, self–regulation, and kindness to others. Participants in the Targeted Academic Intervention (TAI) groups, which consist of twenty students in second grade, receive additional instruction in literacy three times per week for 45 minutes. Each student is assessed using the STARS Early Literacy for screening, progress-monitoring, and diagnostic assessment. STARS is an evidence based computer-adaptive assessment of 41 skills in seven critical early literacy domains. The assessment correlates highly with a wide range of more time-intensive assessments and also serves as a skills diagnostic for older struggling readers. The RALLY! curricula will be utilized for instruction during the extended learning time. RALLY! is common core aligned, and supports the schools instructional focus on improving reading comprehension, critical thinking and integration of knowledge and ideas. Attendance Supports – The Student Resource Coordinator and Success Mentor will identify a cohort of ten participants in grades k-3 who are at risk of chronic absence and work with the children and families on attendance improvement plans to minimize the number of absences for the school year. Children’s Aid and DOE partners will work together to review students’ absence weekly in order to monitor the need for further intervention. Family Engagement – Children’s Aid engages families in workshops focused on the research and impact of chronic absence, college readiness, and on raising awareness of the executive functioning skills that children need to succeed in school and in life. Additionally, Children’s Aid also offers social emotional learning classes focused on mindset, emotional intelligence and personality at the Mirabal Sisters Campus, one that is within walking distance to our school. Health & Wellness – Children’s Aid operates a School Based Health Clinic in order to meet the medical and dental needs of all the children at PS 8. In addition an MSW case manager provides individual and group counseling. The Student Resource Coordinator assesses children in grades K-3, through the Whole Class Review, and refers for services and supports if needed. All K-5th graders receive annual no touch dental screenings in partnership with Healhtplex and vision screenings for grades 3rd-5th with Helen Keller International. Part 2 – Community School Partnerships Core Services Action Plan Part 2a. Identify the Community-based Organization (CBO) partnerships that you will develop in ELT, Attendance Supports, Family Engagement, and Health & Wellness, their target student population(s), and scope of the services provided. As well as supporting schools’ supportive environment and attendance work, CBOs should be helping to support your school’s instructional focus. CBO Partnership Target Population Scope of Service SY18-19 SMART Goal 6  Children’s Aid 220 Students in Grades K-5 Children’s Aid: Chronically absent students in Grades K-5 Children’s Aid/Boston College: The City Connects Program K – 3rd grade students All youth in the Children’s Aid after school will receive academic enrichment in literacy, mathematics, targeted academic intervention, social emotional learning, fitness activities that include dance and fitness. By June 2019 all students in the Children’s Aid after school will have the indicated frequency of enrichment in the following areas: Literacy-45min2x/week Kidz Math/Kidz Science 45min1x/week Fitness-45min2x/week SEL- 45min2x/week Homework - 30min5x/week Dance - 45min2x/week Nutrition- 45min/2x/week Snack/Supper – 30min5x/week The Student Support Coordinator, in conjunction with the family worker and the Children's Aid Society, will work directly with families of students who are chronically absent to ensure that their children are attending school on a regular basis. Assessment of all K-3rd grade students to identify and address needs based on a 3-tiered system from (1) low, (2a) mild, (2b) By June 2019, Student Resource Coordinator and Success Mentor with the support from the school attendance team will create and implement attendance improvement plans for a cohort of ten students in K-3rd grade who were at risk of chronic absence in the prior year. As a result, 80% of children will miss fewer days than the previous year. By June 2019, students assessed by the City Connects Resource Coordinator and who are identified in tier 2 and/or 3 will receive case-conferencing. 7  Part 3 – Budget and Resource Alignment moderate, and (3) intensive. Part 3a. Indicate resources your Community Partnership will leverage to achieve your summative SMART goal(s) and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Our community partnership, Children's Aid will leverage part time staff to support school day instruction for Pre-K students for 2.5 hours daily, Success Mentors will work with at risk and/or chronically absent students for 15 hours per week to encourage daily attendance in school, the Community School Director and Principal will have standing meetings weekly to discuss priority areas that include student performance, attendance, family and community engagement, collaboration, integration and service coordination, the CSD/or their designee will participate in all leadership meetings such as the SLT, School Safety, PPT, .and BRT. Children’s Aid after school will use the Kidzlit curriculum incorporating reading materials used during the school day to align, reinforce and strengthen learning through practice. Additionally, youth engaged in the Children’s Aid after school will receive social emotional learning objectives focused on our values rubric of work hard, focus, show love-be compassionate, create community and have fun-feel joy. To support children in this area, all youth in the after school will be assessed for resilience using the DESSA-mini and action plans will be created for youth categorized in Needs. Part 3b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) X X Title I SWP Title III Title I TA X PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century C4E School Achievement X Other Funding Part 3c. Describe how the school will partner with the Lead CBO to do the following: 1. Community Schools are expected to partner with a community-based partner organization (CBO) and together with members of the School Leadership Team, hire a Community School Director. The Director will lead implementation of the asset and needs assessment process, and other critically important coordinating activities. Indicate how you will leverage this aspect of the work. Community Schools are expected to personalize the needs of all students, through strategic programming and services, as determined by the asset and needs assessment, and must also offer Expanded Learning Time (ELT) and mental health programming. In completing this section, ensure that you think about how: (1) the right services are provided to the right students and families at the right time; and (2) how you will seamlessly coordinate services with instructional programming happening throughout and outside of the school day. Indicate how you will implement this work, and describe other programming you anticipate to be in place to strengthen this initiative. Community Schools are expected to emerge as Partnership Schools, which are places where parents and families feel welcome, actively participate in the conversation and decision-making around the renewal of their schools, and have many opportunities to advocate for their children. Monthly meetings and Community School Forums engaging families and community stakeholders will be a critical part of this family engagement strategy. Describe how you will implement this aspect of the work. Community School Principals are expected to meet on a weekly basis with their Community School Director, select Assistant Principals, key staff, and other CBOs, to analyze trends in data and case manage individual students. Data tools – including the New Visions Data Sorter - and training will be available for schools to use. Indicate how you will implement this aspect of the work. 2. 3. 4. 8  1. PS 8 Luis Belliard has partnered effectively with the Children’s Aid for twenty years. The current CBO Director works closely with the school administration to plan, coordinate and implement programming based on the annual needs assessment. The City Connects Student Resource Coordinator will assess student needs in grades K-3 for specific learning, social-emotional, family intervention and support. 2. P.S. 8 continually develops and implements programs that are designed to meet the specific needs of its student and community populations. The core instructional program includes a combination of communication arts, mathematics, science, dual language program and an extensive bilingual program. The seamless integration of services provided by Children’s Aid affords us with opportunities to remove barriers to children’s learning and healthy development. Children’s Aid focuses on student health, wellness and engagement; and provides plentiful opportunities to apply academic knowledge through challenging enrichment activities; support and parent engagement. PS 8 offers a comprehensive, integrated approach to education that extends the hours, services and partnerships of traditional public schools. PS 8 is open all day and well into the evening, during holidays and the summer. The Expanded Learning Time Program/after school serves two hundred and twenty students, offers a literacy-based curriculum that focuses on the theme of community engagement and exploration. Children’s Aid provides all program participants in the after school program academic enrichment in literacy, STEM, social emotional learning, nutrition and fitness. All of the participants in Children’s Aid are assessed via the Devereux Student Strengths Assessment (DESSA-mini) in order to identify student strengths in eight Social-Emotional Learning (SEL) categories: self-awareness, self-management, social-awareness, relationship skills, goal-directed behavior, personal responsibility, decision making, and optimistic thinking. Based on these assessments, students are grouped according to whether they were displaying strong SEL skills, typical SEL skills, or were in need of additional SEL supports. Action plans are then created for students identified in need of additional SEL support that calls for convening of program directors, facilitators, and parents to discuss the possible proactive strategies for participants using the PRIM (Pre-Referral Intervention Manual). In addition Children’s Aid Targeted Academic Intervention (TAI) in literacy focuses on a cohort of second grade students. The students enrolled in TAI receive pre, interim and post assessments to gauge their progress as well as focus areas to ensure a comprehensive approach that supports the mastery of reading skills aligned with the Common Core standards. To ensure maximum alignment with the school day, the after school program will utilize the results of the Diagnostic Reading Assessment and STARS Early Literacy administered by the DOE in order to monitor progress and need. The Student Resource Coordinator will assess students in grades K-3 and make appropriate referrals for intervention that include individual and/or group counseling, mental health treatment plans, and family support via the Children’s Aid Case manager, DOE guidance counselor, and Turn 2 Us Social Workers. 3. Community School PS 8 has created a welcoming and nurturing environment for parents and families. Our Parent Resource Room is a hub for families to attend workshops, trainings and receive support for needed services. PS 8 has a full time DOE/Children’s Aid Parent Coordinator supervised by the Community School Director and Principal that is tasked with coordinating parental engagement/involvement at PS 8. Presently the following meetings are scheduled to engage families in support of their children’s education:  September Family Night: an opportunity for parents to learn about the school’s performance in ELA and Math, grade expectations and school protocols and procedures.  Children’s Aid programs highlighted during Family Night consisted of the following:after school, School Based Health Clinic, Health Connections and the Go! Healthy Program. 9   Thanksgiving Dinner Celebration – a gathering for families whose children participate in the Children’s Aid programs where community is shared. All stakeholders, parents, CBO partners together with the school will work collaboratively to plan and execute the Community School Forum with the goal of engaging families and celebrating our work in partnership and support of student progress. 4. The Community School Principal and CSD will meet weekly on Mondays for their regular check-in and partnership convening in addition to attending the scheduled Cabinet meetings for the school year. Part 4 – Community School Partnerships Oversight Part 4a. Key Staff and Partners 1. Name and describe the scope of involvement of all community partners working in the school (include partners supporting ELT, counseling, enrichment, etc.) 2. Name the members of your Community School Team and how meetings will be organized and structured to engage all stakeholders and be focused on results. 3. Explain data strategies including the use of the data sorter, and steps that the school will take to ensure that the appropriate interventions are provided to the right students 1. Children’s Aid – ELT academic literacy and math enrichment, targeted academic intervention, social emotional learning, youth leadership, parent engagement and Student Supports. Children’s Aid School Based Mental Health Services – psychological and psychiatric evaluations and services, mental health counseling both individual and group. Children’s Aid School Based Health Center – medical, medication management, dental, asthma workshops for students and parents. 2. The following personnel are members of the P.S. 8M School Leadership Team Luis Fernandez, Assistant Principal  Washington Hernandez, Principal  Arnery Reyes, Children’s Aid Community School Director   Hortencia Vivas, Parents Association President  Robert McDougall, UFT Representative  Karen Sestak, Teacher Monthly meetings are convened in order to engage all stakeholders and focus on student progress, school climate, attendance and implementation of curricula. 3. Community School PS 8 will employ the following data strategies to ensure that the appropriate interventions are implemented to students in need: 0   ATS to review attendance data weekly to provide appropriate and timely intervention in support of students attending school every day  DRA, STARS, NYSELAT and NYS ELA and Math assessments.  Review of the DESSA-mini results of students in the Children’s Aid after school program  Review of students in K-3rd grades tier levels assessed via the Children’s Aid/Boston College City Connects initiative. Part 4b. Indicate resources needed including human resources, instructional resources, and schedule adjustments to implement the Community School program. Resources needed to implement the Community School program include full time CSD, program director, assistant program director, social worker, Student Resource Coordinator, office manager, part time data specialist, after school program facilitators, success mentors and specialist. Part 4c. Timeline for implementation and completion, including start and end dates. July 1, 2018 through June 30, 2019. Part 4d. Mental Health Work Plan Separate from this S/CEP, schools will complete a Mental Health Work Plan that will become an addendum to this document. 1  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 2  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: An analysis of the 2018 NYS ELA data indicated that a more rigorous approach to achieving English language proficiency was needed in the modalities of reading and writing. To that end, we coordinated an instructional program grounded in the Citywide Instructional Expectations, Common Core Learning Standards and the Bilingual Common Core Progressions. Close attention will be paid to those strategies that would best support all of our English language learners (ELLs), in the acquisition of second language proficiency. Our Title III funds will be utilized to implement a direct instruction, supplemental program on Saturdays for our grades 2-5 ELL students. Subgroups include ELL-SWDs, newcomers, developing ELLs and students with interrupted formal education (SIFE). In order to support our ELL students in the acquisition of English language proficiency, our Saturday Academy will provide the following: Students will receive eighteen (18) sessions where they will expand their academic English through the content areas using ENL strategies from 9:00 a.m. to 1:00 p.m. from October 2018 to May 2019. The students will divided into four (4) small groups. Each group will spend one hour in each of the content areas including book sharing and STEAM. Every hour students will rotate to another content area, all utilizing ENL strategies, so that by the end of the day every student will have received ENL instruction in all four content areas. All of our students will participate for one (1) hour in our Title III STEAM (Science, Technology, Engineering, Art & Mathematics) class. In this course, students will work collaboratively and learn to use code to develop their own interactive stories, animations and games. This class will encourage students to think critically, as well as dig deeper into subject areas and topics that will prepare them for college and careers. Students will be afforded the opportunity to present their finished product to the entire Title III Program community. Title III monies will not be used to purchase materials for this program. Our Saturday Academy will also be offering our students one (1) hour of "Book Sharing" using materials from Continental Press. During this time, students will be afforded the opportunity to listen and read books across a variety of content areas and genres. In addition, students will work collaboratively on projects based on the books they read and present their work to their peers. Students will be grouped based on their needs as determined by internal (STAR Reading, conference notes, etc.) and external (2018 NYSESLAT) data. Title III monies will not be used to purchase materials for this program. In addition, the program will be supervised by the Assistant Principal in Charge of Bilingual/ENL Education at Public School 8 Manhattan. This is the only program on site at this time and the only supervisor in the school building. Any additional funds needed to implement and sustain this program will be taken from other school funding sources. In total, the Title III Saturday Academy will employ four (4) teachers and one (1) supervisor. 3  Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: After reviewing the observational data gathered during informal walk-throughs of our bilingual and ENL programs, we will provide high quality professional development with a focus on analyzing data to inform and drive instruction for all of our ELLs. Two (2) professional learning sessions will be provided on Friday, October 19, 2018, and Friday, March 1, 2019, from 2:45 p.m. to 4:45 p.m. for the four (4) teachers and one (1) supervisor participating in the Saturday Academy. During these professional development sessions, teachers will review effective research-based strategies that will support our ELLs English language development. In addition, our Bilingual/ENL Coordinator, Ms. Marcia Campos, participates in District 6's ELL Leads Workshop Series. This series of workshops is designed to facilitate continuous learning among ELL educators. The goal of each session is to deepen participants' understanding and knowledge of ELL policies and effective instruction. The instructional focus is on literacy across disciplines. This series will use the knowledge-building approach to developing language in unit design within an Advanced Literacy framework. Participants will learn to design instructional units for knowledge building in content areas and reflect on their practices in the classrooms to affect students’ learning. The following topics will be addressed in this workshop series: Topic One: Knowledge-building approach to developing language – Unit Design in Advanced Literacy Framework Topic Two: Design learning tasks in content area units Topic Three: Scaffold Interactive Learning tasks in units Topic Four: Bring It Together – Units for ENL Co-teaching and Stand-Alone Classrooms Topic Five: Share of Learning – What Was the Impact on Learning? Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: Title III funds will also be utilized to establish a Parent Support Group that will meet for seven (7) sessions beginning in October 2018 and ending in April 2019. Each session will be for one (1) hour for a total of seven (7) hours. The sessions will be facilitated by Ms. Marcia Campos, ENL/Bilingual Coordinator, every second Friday of the month from 9:45 a.m. to 10:45 a.m. The topics that the Parent Support Group will cover are: * Strategies to support their children's oral development: Friday, October 12, 2018 4 Part D: Parental Engagement Activities * Strategies to support their children's literacy development, Part 1: Friday, November 9, 2018 * Strategies to support their children's literacy development, Part 2: Friday, December 14, 2018 * Strategies to support their children's social-emotional development: Friday, January 11, 2019 * Strategies to support their children's mathematical development: Friday, February 8, 2019 * Informational session regarding promotional criteria and the Common Core Standards: Friday, March 8, 2019 * Informational session regarding their children's internal data--- STAR Early Literacy (SEL), STAR Reading and STAR Math: Friday, April 12, 2019 All sessions and notifications will be presented in a bilingual format. Parents will be notified about the activities listed above via a flier sent home with the students. Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits) N/A  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 5  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 06 School Name The Luis Belliard School Borough Manhattan School Number 8 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Washington Hernandez Coach Peggy Montalvo/Literacy Coach ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Marcia Campos Teacher/Subject Area Annette Saxton/ AIS Teacher/Subject Area Olive Josuweit/ AIS Related-Service Provider Ana Aponte Superintendent Manuel Ramirez Assistant Principal Luis J. Fernandez Coach Yahaira Baez/ Math Coach School Counselor Zuleyka Cruz Parent Hortencia Vivas Parent Coordinator Carmen Natera Field Support Center Staff Member type here Other (Name and Title) Joanna Matos, ENL Teacher; Ana C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 4 4 2 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 0 2 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 2 2 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 9 0 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 553 6 Total number of ELLs 174 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 31.46%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Spanish Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Opened (e.g., 2013-14) Lang. Span. 2001-2002 Program TBE TBE TBE DL K 0 2 1 0 1 2 0 1 3 0 1 4 0 1 1 1 1 2 1 DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 5 0 1 1 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 7 0 0 7 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? Public School 8 Manhattan uses the following assessment tools to assess the early literacy skills for our ELLs. The STAR Early Literacy (SEL) and/or the STAR reading assessments are given to all students (monolingual and bilingual) every eight weeks to measure their grade level reading proficiency and comprehension in English. Also, we administer in grades K-2 The Developmental Reading Assessment-2 (DRA-2) in order to gather additional data about our students' reading proficiency in the early grades. The DRA-2 is administered three times a year; September, January, and May. In addition, ELL students in the 2 nd to 5 th grade Dual Language classrooms are assessed with the STAR Reading Spanish assessment. This assessment tool measures students' reading proficiency and comprehension in Spanish. Also, all Dual Language students in K to 2 nd are assessed in reading proficiency and comprehension with the Evaluacion de desarrollo de la lectura-2 (EDL-2) According to the results of the assessments listed above, ELLs who are proficient in L1 are able to increase levels, in both 7  languages, more rapidly than ELLs who are not proficient in the L1. The data we collect from the assessments above will be used to inform teachers' instruction, to form small groups, and to establish close reading and interactive writing groups in both languages. Also, this data will be used by the RTI team to target and provide individual services to students. In addition, teachers and students can use the results of these assessments during conferences to formulate individual goals in reading and writing. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? * An assessment calendar is developed during the summer and distributed to all staff members in September. Teachers utilize this calendar when planning for the administration of assessments to students. * In addition to Monday's Professional Learning time (2:20 p.m. to 3:40 p.m.) and Tuesday's Other Professional Work time (3:00 p.m. to 3:35 p.m.), all teachers are provided with at least one common planning period a week to look at student work, analyze data and make adjustments to their instruction. * Our Data Specialist assists teachers in gathering and analyzing students' data. * Accelerated Reading Coordinators are utilized to assist teachers in analyzing STAR Reading and Math data. This data is used to inform instructional planning. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? The bilingual coordinator and assistant principal in charge of bilingual programs analyze the NYSESLAT data at the beginning of the school year to assess the success of our students in each program. In addition, we measure the amount of progress made by the ELLs at our school versus our non-ELLs. The administration then uses that data to create school-wide goals and an action plan describing how we will support our ELLs. Also, teachers use the data to create classroom level goals for their students. During the school year, P.S. 8M evaluates the success of our programs by analyzing the results of the formative (DRA-2, EDL-2, STAR Reading, STAR Math, STAR Reading Spanish, conference notes, etc) and summative (PBAs in Literacy and Math, NYSESLAT, NYS ELA/Math, etc) assssments we administer. Adjustments are made to the action plan we created for our ELLs during the school year based on our findings. In August, the bilingual coordinator and assistant principal in charge of bilingual programs will analyze the NYSESLAT data. With this information, we will evaluate the success of the programs we offered our ELLs at Public School 8 Manhattan. Goals will be created and an action plan for each program will be developed based on the information we gather from our analysis. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? * The out-of -classroom ENL team provide services to our ELL students in monolingual classrooms that are not taught by the certified ENL instructor. Summative data, such as, but not limited to, the New York State ELA and Math tests and the end of year STAR Reading and Math assessments, are analyzed to determine when it's best to serve a particular group of ELL students. * Summative data is also utilized by the AIS team to determine students that will receive intervention services. For grades K-2, the STAR and DRA-2 data is used. In grades 3-5, the New York State ELA and Math tests and the end of year STAR assessments are utilized.* Cabinet team members (the administration, the mathematics coach and the grades 3-5 literacy coach) provide intervention services to Level 1 ELA and Math students not receiving services from the ENL or AIS team. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] 8  Once the data is gathered and analyzed, the teachers use the information to plan and provide in-class intervention for those students in need. Students identified for Tier 1 intervention will receive small group instruction with a focus on building vocabulary and accountable talk. Formative assessments, such as, but not limited to, STAR and Friday math quizzes ("Frizzes"), will be used to monitor students' progress. In the event a student does not show progress while receiving Tier 1 intervention, the student will then be targeted by the AIS team to receive small group, more intensive intervention (Tier 2) by a qualified AIS teacher. If the student does not show progress while receiving Tier 2 intervention, the student will then receive intensive, individualized intervention (Tier 3) by a qualified AIS teacher. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. The data patterns across proficiency levels reveal that most of our students achieve high levels of proficiency in listening and speaking and low levels in reading and writing. This pattern is consistent with the stages of second language acquisition: Pre-Production Stage (The Silent Period), Early Production, Speech Emergent Stage, Intermediate and Advanced Fluency. Furthermore, our NYSESLAT data reveals that the majority of ELLs across all grades increased at least one proficiency level or more. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? * Excel spreadsheets titled "Data Profile Sheets" were created for all teachers at Public School 8 Manhattan. The Data Profile Sheets show teachers all pertinent data (e.g., New York State assessments results, STAR test results, DRA-2 levels, attendance data) for every student in his or her class. The sheets are utilized during horizontal and vertical planning and professional learning sessions. New data is inputted by the Data Specialist on a periodic basis and updated copies of the document are distributed to teachers. * Teachers, instructional coaches, and teacher assistants are provided with 80 minutes on Monday (2:20 p.m. to 3:40 p.m.) and 35 minutes on Tuesdays (3:00 p.m. to 3:35) to disseminate and analyze student data in order to make adjustments to instructional programs. * All grade level teacher teams are afforded at least two common planning period a week to disseminate and analyze student data in order to make adjustments to instructional programs. * Cabinet team members (administration, instructional coaches, and the Dean of Student Support) meet twice a month to analyze data and evaluate the effectiveness of our instructional programs. * The School Leadership Team (SLT) meets twice a month to analyze students' data and evaluate the effectiveness of our instructional programs. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. Instruction for our ELLs is delivered using specific strategies (Total Physical Response [TPR], visuals, etc.) that support the development of both languages. Currently, we are comprised of the following organizational models: Integrated Model and Stand Alone Model. One ENL teacher is co-teaching our four monolingual classrooms for a minimum of 180 minutes during literacy and math instruction to support the English language learners. Also, the two ENL teachers 9  provide additional ENL stand alone instruction for a minimum of 180 minutes to the entering and emerging students in the monolingual classrooms. Our classes are heterogeneous and travel together as a group. Classes are organized according to the language proficiency levels as per the NYSESLAT scores and instruction is given according to the program model as per CR Part 154.2. This year we have established the Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ICT) model in grade 1, grade 2, grade 3 and grade 5. It is designed as a model of intervention service that maximizes the instructional program by empowering teachers to utilize co-teaching strategies, collaborative planning, and data analysis to meet the individual needs of all the ELLs in those grades. In addition, we have established Freestanding ENL classes in grades K and 2. Both models offer the opportunity to differentiate instruction according to student's needs and improve achievement gains in all subject areas. We strongly recommend to our parents of ELL students that programs (dual language, freestanding ENL, etc.) are not changed from year to year because this can impact negatively on the student's learning and English language development. However, if a program change is deemed necessary, it is done before or at the beginning of the school year. b. TBE program. If applicable. N/A c. DL program. If applicable. Teachers in the Dual language program are dual certified (bilingual and common branches) and engage in a 50/50 model of instruction in English and Spanish, supporting the development of both languages. The ELLs in the Dual Language program are grouped heterogeneously (all proficiency levels are represented in the class). In order to ensure that the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided, we use the guidelines from The Language Allocation Policy and CR Part 154.2. 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? Teachers are organized by license area to ensure that the mandated amount of instructional minutes is provided to implement strategies, techniques and methods that support the ELL student. Listening, speaking, reading and writing skills are developed according to research-based methodologies. Careful attention to building background knowledge and skills, vocabulary in the content area and opportunities to learn the structures of the second language are emphasized in all models. Common Branch certified teachers in our monolingual classes deliver instruction in English and the teachers use ENL methodologies to support ELLs. ENL certified teachers push into monolingual classes using a co-teaching approach to further support English language development for our ELL population. Teachers in self-contained, Freestanding ENL classrooms hold Common Branch licenses with an extension to teach English as a New Language. They deliver instruction using ENL methodology.Teachers in the Dual language program are dual certified (bilingual and common branches) and engage in a 50/50 model of instruction in English and Spanish, supporting the development of both languages. Students at the entering and emerging levels receive 360 minutes of ENL instruction per week; and students at the transitioning or expanding levels receive 180 minutes of ENL instruction per week in all models. Students who achieve the commanding level will receive 90 minutes of ENL instruction for the following two years after achieving proficiency. All teachers in each program model group students in their classroom according to NYSESLAT proficiency levels. Explicit ENL, ELA and HLA instructional minutes are delivered in each program model as delineated in CR Part 154.2. In Freestanding ENL classes, students receive ELA instruction during the literacy block. ENL methodologies are used to support ELL students in the classroom. In the Dual Language classes, instructional time for ELA and HLA are divided equally, 50% of the week. During ELA instruction, ENL methodology is used to support the ELLs in the classroom. Teachers' schedules are written in color: black to identify subjects taught in English and red to identify subjects taught in Spanish. These schedules are posted 0  outside each classroom door and copies are kept in binders in the principal's and the assistant principals' offices. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. All of the curriculum for our ELL students are fully aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards. In the Self-Contained ENL classes, content area instruction is delivered in English using ENL methodology. In Dual Language classes, math instruction is delivered in both English and Spanish equally, 50% of the week. Science instruction is delivered in English and social studies instruction is delivered in Spanish. In all program models, P.S. 8 Manhattan uses the ReadyGen program within the balanced literacy framework for English language arts. The GoMath program is available in both English and Spanish. In order to make content comprehensible to enrich language development, the teachers in all program models use the following strategies: close reading, shared writing, interactive writing, guided writing, visual aids/realia, explicit content area vocabulary instruction, facial expressions and gestures, Total Physical Response (TPR), graphic organizers, read alouds, technology (internet, videos), cognates and hands-on experiences (Field Trips, experiments, projects etc.). 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? ELLs are evaluated throughout the year in their home language using the following assessments: STAR Reading Spanish, EDL-2 (DRA-2 in Spanish) and teacher made assessments. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status We differentiate the instructional plan for ELLs according to the number of years that they are enrolled in an English language schools system. ELLs are divided among the following categories: SIFE, ELLs with less than 3 years, ELLs with 4-6 years, and long-term ELLs who have 6 years or more. Instructional Plan for SIFE: These students often have literacy and academic gaps and may not be able to read or write in their native language, understand basic concepts, content knowledge, and critical thinking skills that their non-SIFE peers will have mastered. These students receive guided math and supplemental math instruction in Spanish in order to improve basic conceptual and computational skills and practice word problem solving. In addition, these students engage in close reading and shared writing groups in their native language through Tier 1 intervention. Instruction is scaffolded for these students. Furthermore, these students are grouped for participation in the Title III Program. Their specific needs are addressed by an experienced bilingual teacher who understands the language challenges that these ELL students face. Instructional Plan for Newcomer ELLs (3 years or less): These students are predominantly in our transitional model program and receive instruction in Literacy, Math, and all content areas by a highly qualified bilingual teacher. Tier 1 and 2 intervention is given to these students by the classroom teacher and AIS. In addition, these students have an opportunity to participate in our Title III Program. Highly qualified Bilingual, General Education, and ENL teachers will be selected to provide an interactive and structured curriculum that incorporates on-going assessments and differentiated instruction. The Title III program will focus on close reading instruction and project-based learning activities that will promote these students' English language development. Instructional Plan for Developing ELLs (4-6 years): These students receive instruction in English in Literacy, Math, and all content areas through a co-teaching model, an ENL push-in model, and AIS. These students are afforded the opportunity to participate in the Title III and Extended Day program in order to support their academic and language development. 1  Instruction during the school day is given through a guided approach in small groups in order to facilitate learning. Instructional Plan for Long Term ELLs (7 or more years): These students receive an instructional program that incorporates second language methodologies for the development of content area concepts and skills in Literacy, Math, Social Studies, and Science. Highly qualified Bilingual, General Education, and ESL teachers are selected to provide an interactive and structured curriculum that incorporates on-going assessments and differentiated instruction. A differentiated instructional program that supports the development of content vocabulary and second language grammatical structures are emphasized throughout the planned curriculum. Our emphasis will be on close reading. These students will also be invited to the Title III Program. Former ELLs (In years 1 and 2 after testing at the Commanding Level or students who scored expanding on the NYSESLAT and achieved a Level 3 or 4 on the NYS ELA test): Continued support will be given by a highly qualified ENL teacher who, through the use of ENL methodologies, will provide the students with an additional entry point into the lesson. All instruction given to Former ELLs will continue to focus on their oral and vocabulary development through the use of higher order questioning and accountable talk. Small group, close reading instruction will continue to be used in order to expose students' to complex texts and increase reading levels. These students will also receive modifications entitled to ELLs for the first two years after testing on the commanding level in the NYSESLAT. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? Our ELL-SWD students receive an instructional program that incorporates second language methodologies for the development of content area concepts and skills in Literacy, Math, Social Studies and Science. Highly qualified Special Education, Bilingual and ENL teachers are selected to provide an interactive and structured curriculum that incorporates on-going assessments and differentiated instruction. These students are provided with Tier 1 and Tier 2 intervention through a push-in or pull-out model. They utilize technology, such as, but not limited to, Accelerated Reader, English in a Flash, Starfall, MobyMax and Laptops. Technology maximizes students' interest and give them hands-on opportunities to interact with current trends. The teachers in all program models where ELLs are taught, including ELL-SWDs, use the following strategies: close reading, shared reading, guided reading, buddy reading, read alouds, shared writing, interactive writing, guided writing, cooperative learning, flexible grouping, real-world problem solving, visual aids/realia, explicit content area vocabulary instruction, facial expressions and gestures, Total Physical Response (TPR), accountable talk prompts, use of graphic organizers, technology (Internet, etc), cognates (associations), and hands-on learning activities. By implementing the strategies listed above, we are providing both access to academic content area and accelerating English language development for our ELL-SWD students. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? Teachers modify lessons based on the needs of their students as evidenced by the data collected. Teachers of ELL-SWD students may provide these children with an entry point to the lesson by changing the way the materials and classroom activities are presented. Furthermore, teachers, in conjunction with the administration, parents, and related service providers, may elect to incorporate flexible programming into the student's IEP in order to give the child an opportunity to experience and succeed in the least restrictive environment. For example, an ELL-SWD student in a self-contained special education classroom may receive instruction in an ICT classroom or general education for a portion of the day. All lessons for all students are aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards with modifications for individual students in order to ensure that each student's academic needs and IEP goals are met. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. 2  Academic Intervention Services (AIS) are provided to assist struggling students in achieving Common Core Learning Standards in Literacy, Mathematics, and across all content areas. In addition, guidance counselors and support staff, such as SAPIS (Substance Abuse Prevention/Intervention Specialist) and the school psychologist are on hand to provide intensive guidance to students whose emotional, social, and personal issues are impacting their ability to succeed academically. The services offered vary in intensity depending on the needs of each individual student. All Grade 3-5 ELL students performing in Level 1, as evidenced by the 2017 NYS ELA assessment, are deemed at-risk and will receive appropriately targeted services in English. These students are targeted by the school's AIS team and receive support, such as small group instruction in literacy (ReadyGen) and math (GoMath). (Small group instruction during literacy block and additional instructional periods.) The following intervention programs will be utilized at Public School 8 Manhattan: * Accelerated Reader/Accelerated Math * English in a Flash/Math in a Flash * Guided Reading/Strategy Groups * Great Leaps* Orton-Gillingham: Wilson, Fundations, S.P.I.R.E, IMSE--- Institute for Multi-Sensory Education * S.P.I.R.E* REWARDS* Language Proficiency Intervention Program- Science Content * MobyMax * Hooked on Phonics Master Reader* Supporting Literacy and Math Games 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? Since the 2015-2016 school year, Public School 8 Manhattan has entered into a partnership with the Turn to Us program. This program will address the social-emotional needs of our students and their families. Special attention will be paid to addressing those specific social-emotional needs that the families of our ELL students are experiencing. In addition, the Parent Support group will continue at our school. The program will create and develop the following goals: 1) To create a culture of mutual trust and positive attitude that support academic, social, and personal growth. 2) To develop better study habits for home and school. 3) To develop ways/strategies that parents and children can plan together (developing good habits, listening with respect, applying past knowledge to new situations). 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? Beginning in the 2017-2018 school year, Public School 8 Manhattan discontinued its kindergarten transitional-bilingual program. According to data gathered from various assessments (STAR Early Literacy, DRA-2, STAR Spanish Literacy, EDL-2, observational data, etc.), ELL students in the dual language program academically progressed at higher and faster rates compared to ELL students in the transitional-bilingual program. In response to this data, Public School 8 Manhattan is opening up an additional dual language classroom to replace the closed transitional-bilingual class. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. ELLs are given the opportunity to participate in every program offered at Public School 8 Manhattan. The Children's Aid Society (CAS) after school program is available for all students, grades K-5. This program offers supplemental instruction in literacy, math, science, social studies, and the arts in a smaller group setting. Also, CAS offers students support in their social and emotional well- being by providing a guidance counselor on hand to address their needs in this area. A Title III Program on Wednesdays/ Thursdays (Grade 2) and Saturdays (Grades 3, 4, and 5) will be offered to all ELLs in grades 2 through 5. This program will focus on providing close reading instruction to students with an emphasis on higher-order thinking questions, vocabulary development, and accountable talk. Also, Empire State NYSESLAT by Continental Press will be used to prepare students for the 2016 NYSESLAT assessment and develop the students' skills in the four modalities (speaking, listening, reading, and writing). 3  12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. During the 2017-2018 school year, Public School 8 Manhattan will be implementing the ReadyGen literacy program within the balanced literacy framework. Teachers will develop objectives and modify lessons as necessary to meet the specific needs of our ELL and SWD students. Mathematics is taught using Go Math in grades K-5. The program is available in English or in Spanish, depending on the language of instruction within the classroom. Go Math includes sections labeled intervention, Enrichment, Extra Practice, and ELL Support. These sections give teachers the opportunity to provide students with different entry points into the lesson. Go Math is aligned with the Common Core Learning Standards. ENL is taught in all bilingual settings through the content area. Social Studies is taught utilizing the Houghton Mifflin Harcourt's Social Studies, New York Edition, program. The textbooks are available in both English and Spanish. However, different resources and materials are used to supplement the curriculum. These resources are, but are not limited to, books, periodicals, notes, and/or action research. Each grade has a different theme. Science is done through hands-on experiences. Delta Science kit, aligned with a Science Scope and Sequence Map established by the NYC Department of Education, are used in all grades (K-5). In addition, all students grades K-5 are equipped with science books, articles, and resources, in both languages, if needed. Most classrooms with ELL students may contain listening centers equipped with books, tapes, or CD's that support both language development and content area instruction. Public School 8 Manhattan believes that children learn best when they have access to technology. Therefore, technology is integrated into all curricular areas through the use of in-classroom computers, a media lab in the library, mobile lap-top carts for all grades 3-5 classrooms, and a Triumph Board in every classroom. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Every Bilingual classroom is provided with instructional materials in both English and Spanish. Libraries in these classrooms are equipped with books in both English and Spanish. In all of the dual language classes (grades K-5), the teachers utilize various resources and materials in Spanish to teach reading and writing workshop during the literacy block. Students are assessed in Spanish with Evaluación del desarrollo de la lectura, Segunda Edición (EDL-2), For ELLs in the monolingual classrooms, teachers are provided with library books, bilingual word to word glossaries, and materials in the students' native language. Leveled books are available for all teachers of ELLs in English and Spanish. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. All services are grade level specific and/or support the four modalities of language acquisition. To that end, resources correspond to the ages and grade levels of all ELL students and instruction is differentiated based on the needs of the individual student. For ELL-SWDs, all resources and services stated on their IEPs are provided. At Public School 8 Manhattan, we have a bilingual speech therapist, a bilingual SETSS instructor and a bilingual IEP iteacher who provides these services to our ELLs if it is stated on their Individualized Educational Plan. Additionally, all teachers, including ENL, AIS, and cluster teachers, who serve ELL-SWDs refer to their students' IEPs to ensure that the lessons and plans being developed are modified to correspond to the students' ages, grades, and cognitive needs. The ENL teachers also refer to the Bilingual Common Core Progressions when planning new language instruction for their ELL-SWDs. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? Public School 8 Manhattan does not share the building (co-location) with another school. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). Currently a program has not been established at our site to orient newly arrived ELLs prior to the start of the school year. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? N/A 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. 4  In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? The target language in our Dual Language Program from K-2 follows a 50-50% model. EPs and ELLs are immersed in both languages from the beginning. All of our DL students (K-5) receive two and a half days of English instruction and two and a half days of Spanish instruction weekly. EPs and ELLs in our DL program are integrated 100% of the time. Students in K-5 remain in the classroom with their teachers and either travel or stay as a group during preps and lunch. In addition, they go up in grades as a group. Students in the Dual Language program in K move as a group to first and so on. They start as a group/class in Kindergarten and finish as a group/class in the fifth grade. This is very helpful because the parents know each other and are more willing to attend meetings and offer their support. In addition, parents assist us in selling the program to incoming new parents. Students in our DL program receive instruction in English for Science and Spanish for Social Studies. All other curriculum areas are taught according to the language of the day; English or Spanish. Language in our DL program is separated for instruction during the two and a half days in English and the two and a half days in Spanish. In our DL program emergent literacy is not taught in the native language first (sequential). Both languages are taught at the same time (simultaneous). Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? In order to support our staff in improving instructional practices that meet the needs of our ELLs as well as our wider student population, professional development opportunities are offered to all teachers and support personnel including assistant principals, bilingual coordinators, paraprofessionals, guidance counselors, special education teachers, and related service providers. In order to provide professional learning opportunities that targets our staff's needs, a Professional Learning Committee, comprised of classroom teachers, instructional coaches and members of the administration, was formed to create and periodically revise Public School 8 Manhattan's Professional Learning Plan. The committee administered an initial Professional Learning Survey to gather data on the type of professional development our staff wants to experience. In addition, the team will analyze Advance and students' data during the drafting stage of our Professional Learning Plan. This data will be revisited and reviewed when the team revises the Plan. All staff is provided opportunities to plan horizontally and vertically. Horizontal and vertical planning opportunities are provided on Mondays from 2:20 p.m. to 3:40 p.m. and Tuesdays from 3:00 p.m. to 3:35 p.m. Also, teachers are given grade-level, common preparation periods at least twice a week on their schedules. Teachers are encouraged to use that time for horizontal planning. It is expected during horizontal planning that teachers analyze students' work, identify gaps and plan tiered lessons based on the data analyzed. Teachers are also expected to use students' NYSESLAT data and the Bilingual Common Core Progressions when modifying lessons and tasks for their English language learners. 5  In addition, all-day professional learning sessions are provided for all staff members in November and June. Peer intervisitations sessions are facilitated by our instructional coaches. During this time, teachers observe and analyze best practices. The coaches then follow up with teachers and assist them in executing these best practices in their classrooms. Since 31.46% of the school population is classified as English language learners, best practices to support these students will be a focus. In order to support our staff in improving instructional practices that meet the needs of our ELLs as well as our wider student population, professional development opportunities are offered to all teachers and support personnel including assistant principals, bilingual coordinators, paraprofessionals, guidance counselors, special education teachers, and related service providers. Throughout the year, our staff selects and receives professional development sessions that includes, but is not limited to, the following: * Analysis of NYSESLAT Assessment in Grades K-5 to Plan for Instruction: On and off site opportunities are provided to teachers to review and analyze the NYSESLAT in order to determine the implications this assessment will have on their daily instruction. Furthermore, teachers are given opportunities to plan and adjust lessons based on the needs of their ELL students so that they can achieve growth on the NYSESLAT assessment. Throughout the year, the administration and coaches are present during these sessions to provide support and feedback, thus ensuring that proper modifications are being designed to address the needs of our ELL population. * Analysis of NYS Assessments in Grades 3-5: ELA, Math, and Science: On and off site opportunities are provided to teachers to review and analyze the Grades 3-5 NYS ELA, Mathematics, and Science (Grade 4 only) assessments in order to determine the implications these assessments will have on their daily instruction. Also, teachers are given opportunities to plan and adjust lessons based on the needs of their ELL students so that they can achieve growth on the State assessments. Throughout the year, the administration and coaches are present during these sessions to provide support and feedback, thus ensuring that proper modifications are being designed to address the needs of our ELL population. * Using Assessments to Differentiate and Plan Literacy and Math Instruction: During both horizontal and vertical team meetings, teachers analyze student work and formative assessments in order to inform their instruction. Special attention is given to the current and former ELL population, thus ensuring their needs are being addressed as evidenced by the data analyzed. * Integrating ESL Methodology into Daily Teaching and Learning: On and off-site training is provided for teachers on how to incorporate ESL methodology and strategies into their daily practice. Ongoing support is given to teachers by the administration and coaches during planning sessions [PLT and grade-level meetings], thus ensuring that the proper modifications are being designed to address the needs of our ELL population. * Using the Common Core Learning Standards to Plan Instruction: On-site training is given to the staff on how to effectively use the Common Core Learning Standards to plan instruction. Special attention is given to developing modifications and providing various entry points into the lessons for our ELLs, thus giving these students the opportunity to achieve grade level Standards. * Vocabulary Instruction in the Classroom to Build Academic Language: On and off site professional development is given to teachers on how to teach academic vocabulary to ELLs, thus increasing these students' cognitive academic language proficiency. * Analyzing the STAR Reading and Math Data to Plan for Instruction: Time is dedicated during grade-level meetings for teachers to analyze the STAR Reading and Math data. During these sessions, teachers use the data analysis to plan for instruction and develop modifications for all of our subgroups, including the ELLs, thus providing all students with an entry point into the lesson. 6  * Student to Student Discussions Using Common Core Learning Standards Language: On and off site professional development sessions are given to teachers on how to effectively promote student to student discussions into their lessons. These sessions address the benefits this practice has on ELL students' English language development. * Technology Integration into Daily Classroom Practice: On-site professional development sessions are given so teachers can effectively integrate technology into their daily instruction. In order to maximize the programs' benefits, time will be provided for teachers to plan and make adjustments, as needed, in order to support our ELL population's English language development. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. On site and off site professional development on planning effective instruction for ELLs across all subject areas are provided to all teachers during grade level meetings, Title III professional development sessions, and full-day professional development days. During these sessions, teachers are given the opportunity to analyze their ELL students’ data (student work, formative assessments, etc) and create modified lessons with multiple entry points, thus affording all students access to the lesson. In addition, all teachers will receive training from CUNY-New York State Initiative for Emergent Bilinguals and are expected to implement the strategies into their daily instruction, thus providing their ELL students with the support they need to increase their English language proficiency. Agendas and attendance records are kept on file in the assistant principal's office in charge of bilingual programs. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? All teachers of English language learners individually meet with their parents or guardians at least once a year, in addition to parent-teacher conferences, initial parent orientations, or other scheduled meetings provided for parents or guardians, to discuss the goals of the program, the student's language development progress, their child’s English language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas. This additional meeting includes school staff necessary to sufficiently inform the parents or guardians about the student's language development in all content areas in English and in the child’s home language in the case of students enrolled in a bilingual education program. Individual meetings are conducted with a qualified interpreter/translator in the language or mode of communication the parent or guardian best understands. If the parent or guardian communicates in a language that is not spoken by the school staff, the bilingual coordinator contacts the Translation and Interpretation Unit for an interpreter. These meetings take place either during the teacher's preparation time or during the Parental Engagement time on Tuesdays from 2:35 p.m. to 3:15 p.m. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Below are a few of the school-wide activities that are tailored towards parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for their children: 1) Bi-monthly Parent Newsletters written by teachers to inform parents about upcoming events and units of studies in all content areas. These newsletters are sent home in English and Spanish. 2) Parent Coordinator facilitates monthly workshops to parents in a bilingual format. Examples of topics discussed during workshops are: Immigration, Finance, Domestic Abuse Prevention and Parenting Skills. 7  3) Instructional coaches, with support from the parent coordinator, conduct monthly parent workshops in literacy and mathematics. 4) Adult Education classes in ENL (3 times a week--- Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday), GED, Literacy, and parenting through the services of Children's Aid. This is a partnership that is an integral part of the school and provides a myriad of opportunities for parents. 5) Parent participation in the School Leadership Team' decision-making process. 6) Parent Teacher Conferences specific to the AIS-ELL student. 7) Parent participation in committees. 8) Partnership with the Turn 2 Us program that provides parents of ELLs strategies and resources to support their children's social-emotional development. All parent meetings and workshops are facilitated in a language or mode of communication that the parent or guardian best understands. We contact the Translation and Interpretation Unit if they require an interpreter for any language that is not spoken by the school staff. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Paste response here: 8 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Washington Hernandez, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 9  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: The Luis Belliard School School DBN: 06M008 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Title Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) Washington Hernandez Principal Luis J. Fernandez Assistant Principal Carmen Natera Parent Coordinator Marcia Campos ENL/Bilingual Teacher Hortencia Vivas Parent Annette Saxton/AIS Teacher/Subject Area Olive Josuweit/AIS Teacher/Subject Area Peggy Montalvo Yahaira Baez Zuelyka Cruz Manuel Ramirez Coach Coach School Counselor Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Joanna Matos Other ENL Teacher Ana Aponte Other SETTS Arnery Reyes Other CAS Director 0  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 06M008 School Name: Luis Belliard Superintendent: Manuel Ramirez The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Luis Fernandez Assistant Principal Yes Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. In order to determine the school’s written and oral translation and interpretation needs, our assistant principal in charge of bilingual education and the bilingual coordinator first determined the languages the students speak at home. According to RPOB report on ATS, the majority of the our families have identified Spanish as their home language. Most of these families prefer that all written and oral communication is conducted in Spanish, as evidenced by Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS). 25.5% of families at our school indicated English as their home language. The remainder of families have identified Arabic as their home language. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. 1 Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral 5 226 538 0.65% 29.39% 69.96% 3 215 551 0.39% 27.96% 71.65% Arabic English Spanish 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. N/A Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families Parent Newsletters September/October, December, March and May Calendars September Parent Workshop Flyers Minimum Once a Month Documents are distributed to families at least one week prior to the event. Parent-Teacher Conference/Open School Night Announcements September, November, March, and May Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. Every document that is disseminated to the parents/guardians in our school community is distributed in both English and Spanish. Our bilingual coordinator, bilingual secretarial staff, and parent coordinator are in charge of translating all documents. Every document that is disseminated to the parents/guardians in our school community is distributed in both English and Spanish. Our bilingual coordinator, bilingual secretarial staff, and parent coordinator are in charge of translating all documents. Every document that is disseminated to the parents/guardians in our school community is distributed in both English and Spanish. Our bilingual coordinator, bilingual secretarial staff, and parent coordinator are in charge of translating all documents. Every document that is disseminated to the parents/guardians in our school community is distributed in both English and Spanish. Our bilingual 2  Documents are distributed to families at least one week prior to the event. Notices Regarding State Assessments March to June Documents are distributed to families at least one week prior to the event. Flyers Notifying Parents of Upcoming Holidays Distributed to Parents as Necessary Throughout the School Year Documents are distributed to families at least one week prior to the event. Information about After-School Programs Distributed to Parents as Necessary Throughout the School Year Documents are distributed to families at least one week prior to the event. coordinator, bilingual secretarial staff, and parent coordinator are in charge of translating all documents. Every document that is disseminated to the parents/guardians in our school community is distributed in both English and Spanish. Our bilingual coordinator, bilingual secretarial staff, and parent coordinator are in charge of translating all documents. Every document that is disseminated to the parents/guardians in our school community is distributed in both English and Spanish. Our bilingual coordinator, bilingual secretarial staff, and parent coordinator are in charge of translating all documents. Every document that is disseminated to the parents/guardians in our school community is distributed in both English and Spanish. Our bilingual coordinator, bilingual secretarial staff, and parent coordinator are in charge of translating all documents. Information regarding Children's Aid Society (CAS), Public School 8 Manhattan's CBO, is translated by CAS staff. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide Two (2) individual parent-teacher conferences November and March Furthermore, starting in September 2015, Public School 8 Manhattan entered into a partnership with the Turn to Us program. And, our school will continue its partnership with the CUNY-New York State Initiative for interpretation service(s)? Bilingual out-of classroom teachers, bilingual guidance staff, bilingual paraprofessionals and our bilingual payroll secretary provide interpretation services during this event. 3  Emergent Bilinguals. This program will provide workshops to the parents of emergent bilinguals on how to best support their children academically at home. Two (2) Open School Nights September and May Once a year As mandated in CR Part 154-2, teachers of students who receive mandated ENL services will meet individually with parents to discuss their children's English language development All staff members, including the guidance counselor and the attendance teacher, will interact with parents on an informal basis to update them on their children's academic and social-emotional progress. Teacher-Led Workshops Title III Parent Workshops Minimum once a month Turn 2 Us Parent Workshops. These workshops provide parents with strategies on how to support their children both socially and emotionally. Throughout the school year. Throughout the school year as necessary. This interaction will occur primarily during Parental Engagement Time on Tuesdays from 3:00 p.m. to 3:35 p.m. Bilingual out-of classroom teachers, bilingual guidance staff, bilingual paraprofessionals and our bilingual payroll secretary provide interpretation services during this event. Throughout the school year. This interaction will occur primarily during Parental Engagement Time on Tuesdays from 3:00 p.m. to 3:35 p.m. Our bilingual principal, bilingual assistant principal, bilingual out-of classroom teachers, bilingual guidance staff, bilingual paraprofessionals and our bilingual payroll secretary provide interpretation services during this event. Bilingual out-of classroom teachers, bilingual guidance staff, bilingual paraprofessionals and our bilingual payroll secretary provide interpretation services during this event. Bilingual out-of classroom teachers, bilingual guidance staff, bilingual paraprofessionals and our bilingual payroll secretary provide interpretation services during this event. Our bilingual IEP teacher facilitates the Title III parent workshops. The workshops are conducted in English and Spanish. If necessary, our paraprofessional who is fluent in Arabic will assist with translation during the workshops. The Turn 2 Us bilingual coordinator conducts all parent workshops is English and Spanish. If necessary, our paraprofessional who is fluent in Arabic will assist with translation during the workshops. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. 4  All communication to our limited-English proficient families will be made by our bilingual speaking staff. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. A workshop regarding Chancellor's Regulations A-663, facilitated by the assistant principal in charge of bilingual programs, will be conducted in September. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) The Chancellor’s Regulations will be fulfilled by incorporating the translation requirements in every component of the school communication process. All school communications sent home will be translated into Spanish using the expertise of our school personnel and the services of the Translation Unit will be utilized to translate documents into Arabic. All essential school documentation in need of explanation, not provided in Spanish, will be facilitated via parent meetings with oral Spanish translators. Parents who wish clarification on school issues are able to call the school office and are addressed by Spanish speaking staff members. Our administrative and teaching staff are bilingual and able to assist parents with questions and concerns. Signs informing parents of Chancellor’s Regulations A-663 are posted in the main entrance, in the main office, and throughout the school building. Additionally, signs are posted throughout the school in different languages (Spanish, English, Arabic and Haitian) indicating the availability of interpretation services. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? Feedback regarding the quality and availability of services will be gathered from parents via parental feedback forms after workshops. Facilitators will collect and analyze the feedback. All findings will then be reported to the Language Access Coordinator (Mr. Luis J. Fernandez, Assistant Principal). In addition, parents can provide oral feedback to staff members and workshop facilitators. All pertinent information will immediately be communicated to the Language Access Coordinator. 5 
