 05M030 School Name: P.S. 030 HERNANDEZ/HUGHES Principal: TERI STINSON 2018-19 CEP-CS 1  Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC)  Section 1: School Information Page School Information Rafael Hernandez/Langston Hughes 05M030 School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Phone Number: 310500010030 Pre-K through 5 144-176 East 128 th Street 212-876-1825 School Number (DBN): 212-876-4034 Fax: Teri Stinson tstinso@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Geographical District: 05 Email Address: Teri Stinson RudineWright Maria Carrasquillo Maria Carrasquillo Athena Vargas N/A N/A District Information DanikaRux Superintendent: 123 MorningsideDrive - Unit 2 - Room 235, New York, New York 10027 Superintendent’s Office Address: drux@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 212-222-1395 Phone Number: 212-316-0451 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC)   Manhattan FSC: Executive Director’s Office Address: Yuet Chu Executive Director: 333 Seventh Avenue, 8 th Floor, New York, New York 10001 YChu@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 646-470-0721 Phone Number: 212-356-7564 Fax:   Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Teri Stinson RudineWright Maria Carrasquillo N/A Athena Vargas N/A N/A Shell Lewis, Community Learning Schools RhinaGuerrero *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent   Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Karen Brown Dorothy Matthew Tonya Spry Thomas Victor Santos Jessica Roman Member/ UFT Member/ UFT Member/ UFT Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/   Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with   the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement   Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 1. What is your school’s mission statement? The Mission of P.S. 30M is to mold and encourage students to strive to be: Section 4: CEP Overview  Academic and positive risk-takers;  Positive future leaders;    Respectful of diversity; Independent, critical thinkers; Life-long learners;    Researchers with inquiring minds;   Determined, focused, and goal oriented. Inclusive of learning differences and 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. P.S. 30M is a public elementary (Pre K – 5) school that focuses on our students’ achievements and possibilities. As educators, we continuously and intentionally raise our level of expectations for ourselves and our students by enhancing our pedagogical practices. We dedicate ourselves to educating students through many vehicles such as art, music, civic engagement, reading for enjoyment and in the content areas and disciplined academic sustainability that leads to success. Some of our programs include:  Early Morning Math Club - Tuesday, Wednesday and Thursday, Grades 3 - 5  Run With the Champions Afterschool Program - Monday through Friday, Grades K - 5  Run With the Champions Afterschool Program - Chess, Stem Club, Monday and Tuesday, Grades 4 and 5  Morgan Library Bookmaking Club Afterschool Program, Monday, Grade 3  New York Continental Society - Afterschool Memoir Writing Club, Tuesday, Grade 5  Run With the Champions Saturday Academic Program, grades 3 - 5  Boys and Girls Club of Harlem , Afterschool on Mondays and Tuesdays, Grades 1 - 3  Violence Prevention Program - Male Mentoring, Thursdays  Violence Prevention Program - Instruction, 12 week cycle, grades 1 - 3  92nd Street Y - Social Studies and the Arts  CUNY Creative Team Interactive Storytelling - grades Pre-K, K and 1  Church of the Heavenly Rest - Care Projects, Food Pantry, Storytelling.  Academic Intervention Services - Tutoring, grades K - 5  Marble Collegiate Tutoring Program - grades 2 - 5, ELA and Math  Really Great Reading - pull out program for struggling readers, grades 2 - 5  Great Leaps - push-in/pull-out one-to-one to build reading fluency, SWDs and grades 2 - 3  Cycles of Assessment for Data Driven Instruction  Opus 118 - Violin Program    Circulation Library - supported by New York City Public Library  Computers in Classrooms  3K for All  Pre-K for All  Art Grant for ELLs and SWDs Soccer Club - Tuesday and Wednesday, grades 1 - 5 State of the Art Computer Lab We understand that many factors influence how our students perform in school and we accept responsibility to do all we can to ensure their education. To that end, we partner with the United Federation of Teachers through the Community Learning School Initiative. Through this initiative we have established partnerships with several community-based organizations and private organizations, including our own faith-based consortium to address areas of physical, mental, emotional and intellectual development of our children. Our school vision is to produce students who are able to be analytical thinkers as well as to begin the preparation to someday enter the doors of universities. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. 0  Students with Disabilities (SWD) and English Language Learners (ELL) have equal access to school programs with their grade level cohorts for physical education, music, special programs such as HiArt, 92nt Street Y, soccer club and all afterschool programs. Students with Disabilities (SWD) constitute approximately 30% of our school population and English Language Learners constitute approximately 12% and are supported with needed supports such as Great Leaps , Fundations , Really Great Reading, AIS Push-in/Pull Out Programs, Afterschool Enrichment/Academic Programs and Saturday Tutorial Academy which support Math and ELA.. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. Framework for Great Schools Preliminary Report 2017 - 18 Areas of Success Rigorous Instruction. A combination of making connections of the curriculum; teacher team planning, data and next steps; and the Danielson Framework for Instructions. PS 30M utilizes the the Department of Education Curriculum but we closely examine our student data and create unit plans, lesson plans and tasks that create opportunities for students to be challenged, engaged and deepen his/her understanding. The common core shifts are intentionally embedded into the unit plans and lesson plans. Collaborative Teachers: Cultural Awareness and inclusive Classroom Instruction. Teacher Teams work together to plan and discuss data and implications for instruction. The Teams also identify strategies and best practices. Planning, sharing and critiquing. Teacher’s meet with their grade level cohort to plan and discuss, unit plans, student work, lesson plans and next steps weekly. Teacher’s become critical friends by giving feedback to each other after an inter-visitation or viewing task assignment. The Consultancy Protocol is used at most inquiry meetings to look at student work as well as teacher practice. Effective School Leadership: Inclusive Leadership. PS 30M practices shared visioning through building capacity among the staff. Four (4) teachers completed a Teacher Leadership Program sponsored by the Department of Education. In this program, teacher leaders are further developed on presenting and planning professional development, use of protocols in looking at student work, teacher practices, student tasks, materials, texts and informational sharing. A hiring team comprised of teachers take part in the hiring process with a focus on formulating interview questions, reviewing resumes, extending invitations to applicants to be interviewed as well as observing a model lesson and giving feedback to administration. Trust: Parent-teacher trust and teacher-teacher trust. The PS 30M School Community builds trust of Parent to teacher; parent to administration; and trust among colleagues. Administration maintains an open door and addresses concerns and issues. 1  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 05M030 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration PK,0K,01,02,03,04,05 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 252 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 33 34 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 19 17 12 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 94.0% % Attendance Rate 92.5% % Reduced Lunch 11.9% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 1.2% 55.2% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 2.4% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 7.92 0% 10% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 41.2% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 77% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A YES N/A YSH NO Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A NO N/A NO NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A YES High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 42 42 89.1% 0.8% 29.4% 39.7% 1.2% 1.6% 4 10% 6.7 35.1% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No YES N/A N/A N/A NO NO N/A N/A N/A YSH N/A N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Using the Framework for Great Schools as a guide, PS 30M has shown steady growth improvement over a three year span in Collaborative Teachers; Effective School Leadership; Strong Family Community Ties; and Trust. 2018 has shown significant growth in our Strong Community Ties, rising from 2.23 to 3.45 and also Trust which increased from 2.94 to 3.82. Rigorous Instruction has always been a focal point for PS 30 but we experienced a slight decline so therefore based on the data will become an even stronger focus. We will also continue to focus on Strong Family Community Ties. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, students' performance for grades 3 through 5 in both Math and ELA will increase by 15% to levels 3 and 4 as measured by the final scores for 2018-2019 State Exams. 3  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Danielson Framework, 1a, 1e, 3b, 3c, 3d and 4e PD for Teachers for the purpose of improving pedagogy that directly impacts student learning. Teachers grades K - 5 October, Administrators, 2018 - June 2019 Coaches and Teacher Leaders Classroom Inter-visitations. Improve teacher pedagogy that impacts student learning. Teachers grades K - 5 October 2018 - ongoing, as needed until June 2019 Administrators, Coaches and Teacher Leaders Teacher and teacher team planning to focus and monitor alignment of task to student learning; follow-up on student data and determining next steps a) Accountable Talk Stems modeled and represented inside the classroom. Teacher models and monitors use. Students ownership of learning. b) Creating and implementing rubrics for discussions ELA strategies such as annotation, close reading, Signpost for Fiction, Coding for Non-fiction, RAFT. Taught by teacher and implemented by the students to increase student ownership of learning. Skill-based Wednesdays - (Book Club and Math Madness) skill-based focused groupings; questioning prompts, reading, discussion and writing prompts. Targeting of Lowest 1/3 (all grade levels) which includes SWDs and ENLs. Each teacher identifies 7 students for Math and 7 students for ELA to monitor his/her learning through weekly conferencing identifying area of weakness and addressing with a strategy as well as next steps. Recorded in red data binders. Teachers Grades K - 5 Students, K - 5, SWDs, ELLs, lowest 1/3 Students, K - 5, SWDs, ELLs, lowest 1/3 Students, K - 5, SWDs, ELLs. lowest 1/3 Students, K - 5, SWDs, ELLs, lowest 1/3 October 2018 - June 2019 Administrator, Coaches, Teacher Teams Teachers, Coaches Teachers, Coaches Teachers September 2018 - June 2019 September 2018 - June 2019 October 2018 - June 2019 Teachers October 2018 - end of May 2019 a) Data collection in ELA and Math; b) Determining and implementing next steps; c) monitoring and following up on data through a cycle of instruction, analyzing student work and feedback. All students including target groups Monthly (end beginning October Teachers, coaches, data team, administration. 4  One-to-One volunteer tutoring program (Marble Collegiate Church) selected second graders and third graders One to One Marble Collegiate Tutoring Data collection. a) Small group pull-out tutorial program, grades 3 - 5, for Math and ELA. (Use of technology and written materials); b) Individual tutorial program, grades K - 2 (Fundations, Great Leaps, Really Great Reading) Tutoring Data Collection Great Leaps, Really Great Reading, grades 1 - 3 2018) until June 2019 Select students, grades 2 - 5, ELLs October 2018 - June 2019 Administrators, Program Coordinators Program Coordinators. Select students, grades 2 - 5, ELLs. Baseline October 2018, December 2018, February 2019, April 2019, June 2019. Lowest 1/3, grades K - 5, SWDs, ELLs November 2018 - May 2019 Administrators, Tutors Tutors, Data Team, Administration Tutors, Administration Select students, grades 3 - 5 lowest third, SWDs, ELLs, Black Males Lowest third, ELLs November 2018, February 2019, March 2019, April 2019, May 2019 Weekly pullout, October 2018 - May 2019 Open Access Days - 2nd Friday of every month from 8:00 am - 10:30 am. Parents visit and observe his/her child in classroom during instruction. "Coffee Chats" with Parent Coordinator and PTA President, 2nd Friday of every month beginning at 10:30 am after classroom visit from 10:30a.m. - 11:00 a.m. Parent Engagement Tuesdays. Whole school workshops to address common concerns on topics such as homework, behavior, content areas, asthma. 2nd Tuesday of each month. Parents Parents Parents Open Access Library Tuesdays to parents. Weekly and special focus programs once a month Parents October 2018 - May 2019 Administrators, Teachers, Parent Coordinator Parent Coordinator, Administration Teacher, Workshop Facilitator Librarian October 2018 - May 2019 October 2018 - June 2019 November 2018 - May 2019 5 Progress Reports that include rubric scores and teacher narrative, are sent home the months that report cards are not so that parents as partners monitor his/her child's progress. Parents Report Cards Parents Teachers Teachers December 2018, January, April and May 2019 November 2018 March, and June 2019 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Open Access Tuesdays. Progress Reports. (Please see action plan.); Classroom Author's Celebrations (Quarterly); Library Literacy Workshops (Monthly) Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Human Resources: Teachers, coaches, tutors, reading specialist, Librarian Instructional Resources: Curriculum materials, consumable skills workbooks for tutorial sessions, computers in library and classrooms, laptops, ipads, classroom libraries, circulation library books, Red Databinders to tract student progress. Schedule Adjustments - Schedule for tutorial program. Grants: Marble Collegiate, FaceLab Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA X Immigrant Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other 6  Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. School created standards-based benchmarks are given 3 times a year – November, February and May for ELA and Math. By February 2019, students in grades K - 5 performance results will increase by 15% per grade level on the mid-year benchmark given in February 2019. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) Benchmarks, Advance Observation Ratings using the Danielson Framework for Teaching 3b, 3c, 3d, 4e and Student Work Samples. Winter Benchmarks: DRA was used to assess K-2 Reading Levels On Demand Writing Prompts from Writing Pathways was used to assess writing in grades K-2 GoMath Mid-Year Assessments were used to measure K-2 math performance READY Assessments were used to measure ELA and Math performance in grades 3-5 (Skills & Constructed Response) Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 7  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? Based on the Framework for Great Schools Report, our strengths are peer support for academic work (92%); personal attention and support - safety (94%); social-emotional support (96%); classroom environment (83%.) Our focus for supportive environment will focus on structures to support positive behavior patterns in school, classrooms, students, staff and parents. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 30% of teachers will be highly effective in 2a and 2d as measured by the Advance data. 8  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Guidance Counselors (3) will provide mandated counseling; lunchtime flexible group counseling; crisis intervention and/or mediation; Violence Prevention Program (Leadership Progam and Boys and Girls Club of Harlem) SWD, high-need, students in crisis AIS for ENL, SIFE, Overage, lowest-third SWD, ENL, lowest-third September 2018 - June 2019 as scheduled and as needed daily October 2018 - June 2019 Guidance Counselor, CLS Social Worker, CBO - Leadership Program, Boys and Girls Club of Harlem. Reading Specialist ENL Per Diem, Marble Collegiate Tutoring Program, cluster teachers Student and parent Incentives for attendance: Monthly party for classes with 100% attendance; girt cards for parents of chronic absenteeism students with significant attendance (minimum of 10%) improvement; monthly perfect attendance certificates for student and parent (mirror award); field trip for students with best attendance; field trip for student with most improved attendance. Student Incentives for behavior: Bi-monthly Recognition Certificates; Field trip for students with good behavior; field trip for students with most improved behavior; Parent Partnership Recognition Certificates. Students, Parents Pre-K - 5 Monthly, Administrators September 2018 - June 2019 Guidance Family Worker Students, Parents K - 5 Bi- Monthly and/or Monthly, September 2018 - June 2019 Community Resource Director Administrators Guidance U.F.T.T.C. Coaches Community Resource Director Student Government: K - 2 and 3 - 5. Students, K - 5 Bi-Monthly Teachers Parenting Workshops: Parents Attendance & Punctuality Matter October 2018 - June 2019 October 2018 - January 2019 Guidance School Psychologist Social Worker 9  Home-School Connection Homework Help Healthly Eating & Rest Daily and/or weekly shout-outs to celebrate and/or recognize teacher success and/or effort. Celebrations of Supportive Environments. Teachers Teacher Incentives for consistency in best practices Teachers Guidance U.F.T.T.C. Coaches Parent Coordinator Administration Administration September 2018 - June 2019 October 2018 - May 2019 Monthly Teacher Updates on School Safety and Procedures. Teachers, All Staff Sept 2018 - June 2019 Administrators, Guidance Family Support Team (FST) meetings Students, all students Sanford Harmony Program. Character building curriculum program All Students, K - 5 Self-Esteem Clubs: School Guidance Counselors and Violence Prevention Program (VPP) Students, at-risk students Snapshots and Informal Observations Teachers 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Twice a Month, September 2018 - June 2019 Fridays, Period 7, September 2018- June 2019 Tuesdays and Thursdays Weekly, October 2018 - June 2019 September 2018 - June 2019 Guidance, School Psychologist, Administration Teachers Guidance Counselors, Violence Prevention Program mentor Administrators U.F.T.T.C. Coaches How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Monthly Family Engagement Tuesdays, workshops, progress reports and outreach. Acts of Kindness Days aligned with historically low attendance days. Parent incentives; student incentives; and staff incentives. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 0  Human Resources: Teachers, coaches, resource coordinator, guidance counselors, Marble Collegiate volunteers, New York Cares and Boys and Girls Club of Harlem. Instructional Resources: incentives to be purchased for clubs, meeting protocols, classroom materials, library. Schedule Adjustments: Lunch time self-esteem clubs and Student Government meetings. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA X Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A SIG PTA Funded In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, overall summary of teacher performance using indicators 2a and 2d of Advance will indicate that 15% of teachers are rated highly effective. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. ORRs monthly reports and attendance reports. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 1  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Rigorous Instruction and the scope of what is included (curriculum, pedagogy, and assessment) continue to be areas we intentionally assess and modify. The School Quality Guide reflects that we are meeting target however we need improvement in curriculum which is 1.1 of the Quality Review rubric. The feedback received was specific to planning for our SWDs and ENLs. Supporting teachers in writing lesson plans that embed strategies to address SWDs and ENLs learning needs will continue to be our commitment for the 2018 - 2019 school year. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019 100% of teacher teams, K - 5, will engage in two lesson studies, one for ELA and one for Math. 2  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Identify Focus Standards based on data from May-June 2018 Teachers October 2018 Teacher Teams, K - 5, begin lesson study: looking at the data; identifying skill sets needed to achieve mastery; choosing topic/skill of lesson for study Students Teachers, Teacher Teams Teacher Teams will engage in lesson studies using summative data to analyze focus standards; develop a plan of action on teaching the skills; develop lesson plans based on the analyzing of focus standard and best practices; implement the lesson through an inter-visitation using the critical friends protocol and collectively make revisions to re-teach. Teacher, Teacher Teams Weekly meetings and documenting topic and outcomes using the Meeting Protocol Recorder Form. Teachers will use the Consultancy Protocol and other protocols. Specific target area - Extension of Professional Learning Mondays (Making Thinking Visible; Mathematical Mindsets, etc.) Teachers, Teacher Teams Teachers Gap Analysis on student work including SWDs, ELLs and lowest 1/3 Students Consultancy Protocol. Looking at impact of instruction, teacher practices on student learning. Teachers Coaches, Administrators, Teachers October 2018; Implementation November 2018, ELA Coaches, Data Team, Administrators, Teachers Teachers, coaches, administrator December 2018, Math October - November 2018, ELA Jan - Feb 2019, Math September 2018 - June 2019 Teacher Teams, Administrators, Coaches October 2018 - June 2019 Mondays Twice a month October 2018 - June 2019 Twice a month October 2018 - May 2019 Teachers, Workshop Facilitators Teacher Teams, Teacher Leaders, Administration Follow-up Teacher Teams, Teacher Leaders, Administration Follow-up Teacher Teams will create differentiated tasks using the individual student data to create entry point tasks to address Students October 2018 - June 2019 Teacher Teams, Teacher Leaders, 3 skill level along the continuum of the standard(s) inclusive of ELLs. SWDs and lowest 1/3. Assessment: Teacher Teams and Assessment Team will create and/ or administer standards based Benchmarks to be given three times a year. Individual classroom teacher analyzes data and develops an action plan based on the latest data set. Students November 2018, February 2019, May 2019 Administration Follow-up Teachers, Teacher Teams, Assessment Team DRA - K - 3; 3 times a year Ready, 3 - 5, ELA and Math, 2 times a year Math Benchmarks, K - 5, 3 times a year Curriculum Maps. Updates and reviews Teachers Critical Friends Protocol to share and increase the use of best practices for the purpose of positively impacting student learning. Weekly with one grade level selected. Teachers September 2018, January, March, June 2019 and on-going revisiting as needed Weekly from October 2018 - June 2019 Teacher Teams, Administrators, Coaches Administration, Coaches 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Family Engagement Tuesdays; Open Access Tuesdays, Progress Reports, Parent workshops. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Human Resources: Teachers, coaches. Instructional Resources: Attendance and Recording Protocol; student work; professional books. Schedule Adjustments: Common Planning Periods. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. 4  X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA X Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A SIG PTA Funded In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Best practice improvement will be monitored through Advance looking at 1a, 1e, 3b, 3c, and 4e. The Benchmarks in ELA and Math as well as the DRA will be used to measure the impact on student learning. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Student Assessments, benchmarks, student work samples, Advance observations. DRA will be used to assess reading in grades K-3. The On Demand Writing Prompts from Writing Pathways will be used to measure writing in grades K-3. READY Assessments will be used to measure both ELA and Math in grades 3-5 Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 5  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2018 Framework for Great Schools Report: Inclusive Leadership, 93%; Instructional Leadership, 99%; Program Coherence, 97%; Teacher Influence, 92%. We will conintue to focus on building community among all constituencies. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2018, 100% of Teacher Teams K - 5 will select supplemental materials, develop and create instructional materials that impact student learning as evidenced in a 15% increase on the mid-year Benchmarks for ELA and Math and student work samples. 6  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Weekly Teacher Team Meetings Review Curriculum Maps for ELA & Math. K - 5 Create unit plans and lesson plans based on curriculum maps ELA Lesson Study. Create and develop resource instructional materials aligned with lesson Review resources and selection of resources for lesson plans and unit plans. Teacher Teams Teachers, Teacher Teams Teachers, Teacher Teams Teachers, Teacher Teams Teachers, Teacher Teams Teachers Teams will create differentiated tasks using individual student data to create entry point task to address skill level along the continuum of the standard(s) inclusive of ELLs, SWDs and lowest-third. Students Consultancy Protocol. Looking at impact of instruction and instructional resources on student learning. Assessment: Teacher Teams will create and/or administer standards-based assessments to determine student learning and next steps. Teachers, Teacher Teams Teachers, Teacher Teams, students 7 Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? September 2018 - June 2019 Sept 2018, January, March 2019 Administration Administrators, Coaches Sept 2018 - May 2019 Administrators, Coaches October 2018 Administrators, Coaches Monthly, October 2018 - May 2019 October 2018 - May 2019 October 2018 - May 2019 Administrators, Coaches Teacher Teams, Administrators, Coaches, Teacher Leaders Administrators, Coaches, October 2018 - May 2019 Teacher Teams, Coaches, Administrators.  3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Frequent cycles of outreach and marketing beginning in September 2018. Increase outreach for Open Access Tuesdays, classroom author's celebrations, assemblies and programs. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Human Resources: Administrators, coaches, teacher teams, teachers. teacher leaders. Instructional Resources: Advance Observation tools, Teacher feedback form, Benchmarks for ELA and Math, skills books for afterschool and Saturday programs. Adjustments: Common planning periods, inter-visitations as scheduled. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA X Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A SIG PTA Funded X In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, 100% of teacher teams will receive feedback as observation of teacher team meeting and artifacts produced by the teacher team and the student work samples. . Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Advance, Benchmarks 8  Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 9  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2018 Framework for Great Schools Report - Strong Family and Community Ties: Outreach to Parents, 96%; Parent Involvement, 87%; Parent Volunteers, 68% which will our focus for the 2018 - 19 School Year. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, parental involvement will increase 15% as evidenced in attendance at parental workshops; parent volunteers; Parent Teacher meetings; and school events and the Framework for Great Schools Survey. 0  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Monthly Calendars; Newsletters - ELA and Math from Coaches Students and Parents Monthly Newsletter, Class and Grade news. Parents Interpretation for all school correspondences. Telephone calls in Spanish to Spanish speaking families. All correspondences, PTA meetings and other meetings Parents Monthly workshops that target topics such as health and nutrition, behavior management, career readiness. Parent Volunteers. Assist with materials and resources for afterschool program . Outreach to other parents. Open Access Tuesdays Parents Parents Parents Grade level Parent Meetings - Ways to be involved. Parents 3b – Parent and Family Engagement October 2018 - June 2019 October 2018- June 2019 Administration Coaches Administration, Librarian, Guidance Counselor, Community School Director September 2018 through June 2019 ENL Teacher, Guidance Counselors, Administrators September 2017 - May 2019 Parent Coordinator, Community School Director. October 2017 - June 2018 Resource Director, Parent Coordinator, Administrators. October 2018 - May 2019 Teachers, Parent Coordinator, Administration October 2018 - June 2019 Administration Guidance If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. Community Learning Schools (CLS); New York Cares; Marble Collegiate; Boys and Girls Club of Harlem. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 1  Human Resources: Parent Volunteers, Family Worker, School Aides Instructional Resources: Incentives will be purchased to support this goal. Schedule Adjustments: None Datasorter - Attendance Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Attendance at Open Access Tuesdays and Monthly Workshops. Daily, weekly and monthly tracking of attendance rate and students who are chronically absent. By February 2019, chronic absenteeism should decrease by 10% as measured by the February 2019 ATS Attendance Report. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. PAR, ATS reports on attendance, sign-in sheets. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) DRA, Benchmarks, State Exam, formative assessments, student work Students who perform in the 50% and below range. Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Targeted Student Conferencing One-to-one Pull-out Tutorial, K - 2 One-to-one AIS Reading Specialist Silent Sustained Reading Small group Whole Class Fundations Whole Class & Small groups Great Leaps, 3 - 5 One-to-one Weekly during the school day 2X a week 2X a week Daily Daily 2x a week 2 times a week 3  Mathematics Math Predictor, Benchmarks, State Exam Students who perform at 50% or below Whole Class Test Sophistication - Book Club Wednesdays AfterschoolProgram - Fundations, K - 2 Focused Instruction Writing, 2 - 5 Saturday Tutorial Program - 3 - 5, Skill-based, test sophistication Small Groups, Targeted Student Conferencing One-to-one Pull-out Tutorial, 3 - 5 Mental Math Small Group Whole Class Once a week Daily Once a week Weekly during the day 2X week Daily 4  Science Test Sophistication Math Madness Wednesdays Saturday Tutorial Program Benchmarks, unit assessments, formative assessments, Foss Assessments. Writing in the content area using close reading strategies to deepen understanding of the text as well as questioning and discussion techniques Grade Level Projects/Essays/Project-based Learning Whole Class and Small Groups Once a week Small Groups Whole class, small groups, one-to-one conferencing Once a week Weekly during the day Small groups, individuals projects End of Unit Social Studies Benchmarks, unit assessments, formative assessments in Social Studies. All students, all levels Writing in the content area using close reading strategies to deepen understanding Whole class, small groups, one-to-one conferencing Grade Level Projects/Essays/ Project-based Learning Two times a week as scheduled Whole class, small groups, one-to-one End of Unit 5  At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Students performing in lowest third on assessments; ELLs; at-risk behavior students Target student conferencing conferencing with specific feedback One-to-one Weekly during the day Lunchtime Self-Esteem Clubs 2X a week Lunch periods Student Mentoring 2X a week Volunteer Program/Community Service 1X a week Sustainability Initiative College Awareness Program Bi-monthly Monthly Lunch periods During the day, afterschool During the day During the day, Saturdays 6  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. 53 students Our school provides uniforms, school supplies such as bookbags, notebooks, pencils, fees for trips, and counseling. services, Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). NA 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 7  NA 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. NA 8  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. PS 30M has a high retention rate. A hiring team of teachers discusses the openings and the qualifications needed; reviews resumes; creates questions then invites the candidates to be interviewed. If the candidate interviews well then, he/she is invited to perform a demo lesson which includes the principal. The hiring teams makes their collective suggestion to the principal Teachers are not placed in assignment which he/she are not licensed. We support our teachers through the observational process to identify staff members strengths and encourage members to work in their areas of strength for the benefit of the students and where the staff member can excel as well. We provide support to teachers through our coaches, administrators, and collegial teacher teams. Our goal is to support our teachers to develop habits that support and deepen student learning. This is done through professional learning experiences such as inter-visitations, book studies, professional conversations and the introduction of strategies that promote best practices and/or refine current habits of practice. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). Professional Development is provided to not only teachers but to the teaching assistants/ paraprofessionals. Equal access through our weekly Monday professional developments cover best practices that impact student learning. Topics such as annotation; student led discussions; flexible grouping; developing and using rubrics; close reading as well as using the Danielson Framework for teaching to guide planning and implementation. Inter-visitations are done to support teachers in how to utilize paraprofessionals effectively working with small groupings. The past few years, teacher teams use the following structures as part of their weekly planning: Curriculum Alignment of standards, learning outcomes, lesson plan, task/assignments and implementation of lesson; writing meaningful essential questions and outcomes that are aligned with the CCLS; Danielson Framework for Teaching – 3b and 3c; 9  Close Reading Strategy for Fiction; Close Reading Strategy for Non-Fiction: Close Reading Strategy for Math; Writing Smartgoals and Learning Targets; Reflecting on Practices; Effective Feedback. Principal and Assistant Principals are supported through the District 5 Superintendent's Office with monthly professional development as well as participation in Professional Learning Community by engaging in Book studies and Metamorphosis, a math student in content as well as instructional practices. Additionally, the principal receives frequent cycles of professional development through the New Teacher Center on mentoring teachers with 1 - 2 years of experience. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). Use of Explore along with the Pre-K Core Standards. Students’ skills are monitored in all areas. Parents bring and pickup students directly from the classroom. This gives opportunities for daily interactions with the Pre-K staff. In addition, special workshops and gatherings such as Pre-K Open Houses are sponsored throughout the school year. Thanksgiving and Christmas Holiday Celebrations for the parents and students are two of the traditional celebrations hosted inside of the classrooms. Pre-K students participate in Hi-Art beginning in January and enjoy centers inside of the classroom. Teacher collaboration between the Pre-K and kindergarten teachers for the purpose of transitioning students to the next grade. Classroom visits with the students and a open house is sponsored in the Spring for Pre-K parents to become familiar with our kindergarten program. 0  The school is supported through Early Childhood Coaches provided from the DOE Central Network and another from Bank Street College. 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. Grade level cohorts design Benchmarks based on CCLS. Inquiry teams meet to discuss student work, assessments, curriculum maps, pacing calendars, lesson plans and next steps. The teacher teams also discuss practices and delivery of instruction. Teachers use curriculum unit assessments, create formative assessments and authentic tasks to be used for assessment purposes. Professional Development is provided by teachers for the teachers in larger groups as well as teacher teams. The assessment results are used to analyze and to determine next steps for lesson implementation. Flexible groups are formed based on the data as well concepts are re-taught on Re-teach Mondays. Additionally, There's a designated MOSL team that represents the school in selecting the local and state measures as a school community will be rated. Professional Development is provided on school and individual data, summative and formative, to analyze and determine next steps. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 169,990 76,342 12,366 0 2,166,171 X X X Column B Section Reference(s) 5A, 5B, 5C,5D, 5E 5A, 5B, 5C, 5D, 5E 5A, 5B, 5C, 5D, 5E 5A, 5B, 5C, 5D, 5E 1  1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent 2  representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 3  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. P.S. 30, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. P.S. 30 will support parents and families of Title I students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students  providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math and use of technology;  providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and  decision making in support of the education of their children; fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress;  providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments;  sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand;  providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community Parental Involvement and School Quality 4  The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will:  actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact;  Title I Priority and Focus Schools and the parents of students served in the Title I program must jointly agree upon the use of these additional funds to support increased parent engagement/education to enable parents to effectively support their child’s learning.  engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills;  ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and  strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills;  maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability grade-level curriculum and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home;   provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report;  host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the ESSA; schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings, with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help;    Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement 5  The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by:  holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference;  hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year;  encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; supporting or hosting Family Day events;   establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents;  encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers;  providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress;  developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress;  providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between /teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) P.S. 30, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State's Standards and Assessments by: I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; 6  ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; 7 I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff  Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; 8  ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; 9  ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 0  1  Addendum: Community School Partnerships Directions: The Community School (CS) strategy is directly aligned to the Framework for Great Schools. Community Schools bring schools and community partners together and integrate academics, health, youth development, and family engagement to provide students with the tools and opportunities they need to succeed. The Core Services in Community Schools are Expanded Learning Time (ELT), Attendance Supports, Family Engagement, and Health & Wellness. Part 1 – Community School Partnerships Goal(s) How is the CS strategy integrated into academic instruction at your school, and what impact has it had on student academic outcomes? We integrate our community partners into academic endeavors to provide support. We have a faith-based consortium from which we have been able to institute a one-on-one tutorial/enrichment program in collaboration with Marble Collegiate Church. Tutors are members of the congregation who commit to serve as a volunteer tutor, providing both math and English instruction, to targeted students. We noticed that our 3rd grade students were having difficulties with the Math and ELA state exams. There was a dip in the scores with this particular grade cohort. To combat this particular issue, we made use of our partnership with the faith-based community. We also incorporated weekend excursions into the program to address the needs of parents who had not merely requested one-on-tutoring but also additional activities/events in which both students and their parents can enjoy. This has resulted in more parental involvement for targeted students, which has made it easier to engage said parents about their children's progress and also advise of more serious issues that require further attention. We have noted, along with other interventions, that the impact of this program has been both academic and social/emotional in nature. Additionally, we have also provided additional targeted pull-out tutoring for students during the extended day/afterschool hours. We have provided on-site eye examinations with eyeglass selection and dental screenings during school hours to address any barriers that may impede students’ learning so that our students may focus solely on instruction and not any undiagnosed obstructions to learning. This particular program is in its 3rd year of operation and the academic gains continue to exceed epectations. Indicate the summative goal(s) of the Community School for the 2018-19 school year. Be sure to construct the goal to be SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Realistic, and Time-bound. We want to propel our parent involvement and boost enrollment. We implemented a Parent University model during the 2016-17 academic year. We also plan to focus on student attendance. Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Community School Annual Goal(s): How will achieving your Community School Goal(s)--in Expanded Learning Time (ELT), Attendance Supports, Family Engagement, and Health & Wellness--support your academic goals for students? ELT will provide the opportunity for additional academic support, and attendance supports, such as success mentoring that will help us to identify more substantive circumstances with students that may require referral for additional supports. Family Engagement endeavors, such as our Parent University, annual community fair and other yearly events, and weekend excursions via the tutorial program will help to foster a sense of community and aid in making parents allies in their children’s overall success. Additionally, we are hoping to initiate a family attendance initiative in collaboration with New York Cares. Focusing on the dates immediately before and immediately after a holiday, we would like to host family fun evenings to which we will send personal invitations to students (and their families) who have had 95 percent or better attendance for the previous month. These families can be presented with attendance certificates for the month and their photos (family photo) can appear on an attendance board in the main lobby. Getting our parents to ensure that their children are at the school on a consistent basis will support higher academic gains due to consistent instructional time. Part 2 – Community School Partnerships Core Services Action Plan 2  Part 2a. Identify the Community-based Organization (CBO) partnerships that you will develop in ELT, Attendance Supports, Family Engagement, and Health & Wellness, their target student population(s), and scope of the services provided. As well as supporting schools’ supportive environment and attendance work, CBOs should be helping to support your school’s instructional focus. CBO Partnership Target Population Scope of Service Office of Community Schools Leadership Program Boys & Girls Club of Harlem All Students All Studnts All Students Part 3 – Budget and Resource Alignment SY18-19 SMART Goal By June 2019 Afterschool Program Character Building Curriculum By June 2019 Afterschool, academic and clubs By June 2019 Part 3a. Indicate resources your Community Partnership will leverage to achieve your summative SMART goal(s) and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Office of Community Schools; Boys and Girls Club of Harlem; New York Cares; Leadership Program, Marble Collegiate Church, Church of the Heavenly Rest, PS 30M Part 3b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) X Title I SWP Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century C4E School Achievement X Other Funding Part 3c. Describe how the school will partner with the Lead CBO to do the following: 1. 2. 3. Community Schools are expected to partner with a community-based partner organization (CBO) and together with members of the School Leadership Team, hire a Community School Director. The Director will lead implementation of the asset and needs assessment process, and other critically important coordinating activities. Indicate how you will leverage this aspect of the work. Community Schools are expected to personalize the needs of all students, through strategic programming and services, as determined by the asset and needs assessment, and must also offer Expanded Learning Time (ELT) and mental health programming. In completing this section, ensure that you think about how: (1) the right services are provided to the right students and families at the right time; and (2) how you will seamlessly coordinate services with instructional programming happening throughout and outside of the school day. Indicate how you will implement this work, and describe other programming you anticipate to be in place to strengthen this initiative. Community Schools are expected to emerge as Partnership Schools, which are places where parents and families feel welcome, actively participate in the conversation and decision-making around the renewal of their schools, and have many opportunities to advocate for their children. Monthly meetings and Community School Forums engaging families and community stakeholders will be a critical part of this family engagement strategy. Describe how you will implement this aspect of the work. 3  4. Community School Principals are expected to meet on a weekly basis with their Community School Director, select Assistant Principals, key staff, and other CBOs, to analyze trends in data and case manage individual students. Data tools – including the New Visions Data Sorter - and training will be available for schools to use. Indicate how you will implement this aspect of the work. We were fortunate enough to be a Community Learning School prior to be becoming a D.O.E. Community School. We have the same Community School Director who we had while a Community Learning School. The director facilitates the needs assessment process and leverages partnerships with the faith-based community and key community-based partners to assist with both academic and social/emotional supports. Working along with other program leads, the CSD coordinates the logistics for events and key enrichment programing so as to avoid impacting instructional time. Our extended learning time/afterschool is administered by school staff in collaboration with Boys & Girls Club of Harlem. Mondays and Tuesdays serve as enrichment/club days with a rotation for all students (kindergarten through 5th grades) that focus on arts and crafts, sports & health, STEM, and coding lego/robotics. Wednesdays through Fridays will be lead by school staff and will be academic in nature. Boys & Girls club staff will also be serving as success mentors during the day and the same social work interns who will be present during the day will also have assigned days to assist during the ELT; this will help in immediately addressing any behavioral concerns, especially with students who are already receiving services. Ultimately, we plan to ensure continuity of services, especially as it relates to mental health and academic instruction. The teachers know the students strengths and weaknesses and can further address them during ELT and the social work interns will have developed a rapport with the students that will carry over from the school day to ELT. We will continue to make use of our Faith-based Consortium meetings, which are held quarterly. We will invite additional attendees to the last meeting of the year--a bit more individuals from our parent base as well as have consortium members invite attendees from their respective organizations/congregations to attend, as well. We will ask that consortium members lead break-out sessions, too. Part 4 – Community School Partnerships Oversight Part 4a. Key Staff and Partners 1. Name and describe the scope of involvement of all community partners working in the school (include partners supporting ELT, counseling, enrichment, etc.) 2. Name the members of your Community School Team and how meetings will be organized and structured to engage all stakeholders and be focused on results. 3. Explain data strategies including the use of the data sorter, and steps that the school will take to ensure that the appropriate interventions are provided to the right students 1. Boys & Girls club of Harlem will be supporting our ELT (providing enrichment in the form of arts & crafts, STEM, sports and will also provide Success mentors (social work interns) and a social work supervisor who will be assigned to the school to oversee the interns in collaboration with the CSD. 4  2. The Leadership Program will continue to provide push-in social emotional support to our 1st through 3rd grade classrooms and one-on-one mentoring to 10 of our most rambunctious young men between the grades of 1st through 4th grades. The CSD will continue to serve as a point person for this initiative. 3. New York Cares (Family Success Program) will continue to provide support in form of volunteers to man our annual events, i.e. Resource Fair, Book-A-Ween etc. and in-kind donations and monetary support. The CSD will continue to serve as a point person for this initiative. 4. Faith-based Partners (i.e. Marble Collegiate Church and the Church of the Heavenly Rest) will continue to provide academic support in the form of the Marble Collegiate Church Tutorial & Enrichment Program and Snack & Story Time with the Church of the Heavenly Rest. The CSD will continue to serve as a point person for this initiative. 1. Our Community School team consist of the following: Principal, CSD, Two Teacher Center Coaches, Two faith-based/Community leaders, three ELT co-supervisors, Chapter Leader, Chapter Delegate, One parent, and Parent Coordinator, UFT/CLS program manager. With regard to academics, we rely on annual student assessments to guide targeted interventions. The data sorter will play a crucial role in analyzing the correlation between attendance, scores, and support services. We will be able to zero in on cohorts of students and track the success of our efforts to determine what is working and what should be tweaked if not completely eliminated. Part 4b. Indicate resources needed including human resources, instructional resources, and schedule adjustments to implement the Community School program. The major scheduling concern that our Advisory Board (Community School team) has discussed during the past couple of meetings has been the time restraints on Mondays and Tuesdays that have been imposed on teachers by the union contract. We are aware that human capital will be scarce on Mondays & Tuesdays between 2:30 and 4:00 as a result of said contract. As such we have arranged for Boys & Girls Club of Harlem to take on a greater role on Mondays and Tuesdays, especially during the aforementioned timeframe. Space is also an issue as we are co-located with two other schools, so we are aware that we will have to be creative with how we make use of space to accommodate the other schools afterschool programing, as well. Part 4c. Timeline for implementation and completion, including start and end dates. All Community Schools, working with their DOHMH Mental Health Manager, will complete a Mental Health Work Plan that will become an addendum to this document. TBD Part 4d. Mental Health Work Plan Separate from this S/CEP, schools will complete a Mental Health Work Plan that will become an addendum to this document. 5  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 6  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: Begin description here: P.S. 30 has 28 English Language Learners (ELLs) who have been identified during the 2018-2019 school year. The students receive instruction in English from a fully certified ESL teacher as CR Part 154 based on student proficiency levels. P.S. 30 is a K-5 school. Every grade has a specific number of ELLs. There are 6 ELLs in Kinder, 5 ELLs in grade 1, 6 ELLs in grade 2, 3 ELLs in grade 3, 5 ELLs in grade 4 and 3 ELLs in grade 5. Instruction is provided utilizing a Collaborative Team Teaching/small group model of instruction. In order to better meet the needs of the students they are placed in small groups based on the NYSESLAT results from last spring and based on their NYSITELL proficiency levels for new admits. Teachers including the ENL teacher will provide individualized and small group instruction in literacy through out the regular school day based on selected skills the students have show to need extra help in which are also aligned to the common core state standards. With Title III funds P.S. 30 will purchase the language development program On our way to English for grades Kindergarten, first, second and 3rd. Since the students are on different levels the Kindergarten program can be used for the first grade as well. The third grade program can be used for second and third grade as well. This is a comprehensive program that uses the four modalities(reading, writing, speaking and listening) to provide comprehensive instruction. The program will be also used in a small group setting to provide an additional boost in having students acquire academic vocabulary, as well as appropriate grade level skills. The ELLs in P.S. 30 have entered with limited to no base knowledge in their first language making it difficult to acquire the second language in English. The program includes assessments to target the students deficiencies as well as allows for small group/individualized instruction in order to address where the students are struggling to make them better readers and improve their reading comprehension skills. The Really Great Reading Program will be implemented as a supplemental program to students in grades 1-5 as an after school program two times per week for a two hour block,Tuesday and Wednesday between 2:30 pm and 4:30pm for a total of 26 per diem days. The focus will be with grades 3-5. The fully certified TESOL teacher, will create a rotating schedule of students who will receive this intensive program and will be the one to teach the after school program. Additional materials will be purchased to support this program such as Grammar workshop books by Sandlier publications. PS 30 will also purchase bilingual visual dictionaries in Spanish to assist students in the classroom as well as during small group instruction. With Title III funds, P.S. 30 will also have an additional project based afterschool program which will be taught by fully certified ENL teacher. On our way to English, which is a comprehensive language development program will be used in combination with the project based learning activities. This after school program will take place two days a week and scheduled to beginning in December from 2:30pm to 4:30pm for a total of 65 instructional hours. This afterschool program will follow a project based model, and investigate various 7  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information content specific topics in Science, Social Studies, ELA and Math. During the Spring of 2017 the ELLs in the testing grades 3-5 showed to need improvement in the state Math exams as well as in some areas of the ELA. The ENL teacher will work with groups of 5-6 students . Prior to the ENL program beginning the ENL teacher will collaborate with the classroom teachers at P.S. 30 in order to analyze data and look at what skills should be specifically worked with during the afterschool program. The ENL afterschool program teacher will monitor for progress using teacher made assessments specifically targeted for each student and the skills they are working on. P.S. 30 routinely looks at and analyzes updated data on each student and classes in general. Using this data, lessons are planned for considering the skills we feel the ELLs and monolingual students struggle with the most, not only in all four modalities of reading, writing, listening and speaking, but in all content areas as well. P.S. 30 has found that focusing on common skills per week per grade has had a positive impact on student learning and progress. The skills taught will be in conjunction to the skills that the students are being taught during the regular school day in both literacy and math by the ENL certified teachers. Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: During the school year the ENL teacher will participate in Professional development to continue to learn new techniques and strategies that will continue to advance students academic achievements as well as to make content material more accessible. In return the ENL teacher will provide Professional Development to the staff at PS 30 and train them with new strategies and techniques that can be used with the ELLs. Ms. O'Keefe will attend the monthly ELL Leads workshops which facilitated by Pedro DeJesus who is the representative from the Manhattan Field Support Unit. The ENL teacher Ms.O'Keefe will work together with the data team with the purpose of designing a curriculum for the afterschool program. The team will work together at looking at data and obtaining the skills the students need help with. A pacing calendar will be created by the teacher that will go along with the curriculum. A project based model will be used. Project Based Learning is a teaching method in which students gain knowledge and skills by working for an extended period of time to investigate and respond to an authentic, engaging and complex question, problem or challenge. This afterschool "club" will begin on October and run through May of 2018. During the course fo the Title III program the classroom teachers will participate in professional development during the professional development Mondays. For these classroom teachers there will be three professional development sessions each of which will last one hour. All teachers from graders K- grade 5 will be invited to attend. The person who will be providing the staff development is Ms. O'Keefe, the schools fully certified ENL teacher. The topics that will be covered are as follows: 8  Part C: Professional Development 1. How to read NYSESLAT scores and how to use them in flexible grouping 2. Lesson planning for ELLs, How to differentiate the Expeditionary Learning curriculum for ELLs 3. Testing modifications for ELLs, what are their rights during statewide testing? What strategies are available to prepare ELLs for city wide testing? 4. How to use the language art progressions. The success of the PD sessions provided will be assessed by on going teacher assessment, and observation of teacher work in classrooms as well as student progress. The professional development sessions will take place during the scheduled staff Professional Development days. The rationale for selecting the topics mentioned above for professional development is that, " language acquisition develops slowly and when conditions are perfect. The best are those that are provided in low anxiety situations, which contain messages that students really want to hear. These methods do not force the second language on the student, if not it allows students to produce when they are reading". (Krashen, 1981) Teachers will be given the tools and teaching strategies to understand the second language acquisition process and the teaching tools that are needed to make the second language learning process a successful and pleasant one for our students. Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: Additionally, there will be a number of parental engagement sessions held specifically for ELL's and their parents. These sessions will work in partnership with community agencies as well as with guidance and the parent coordinator in PS30. A survey will be created to gauge the parents needs, concerns and wants and then workshops and presentations will be created based off of the communities needs. There will be approximately 11 hours worth of parental engagement. At the beginning of the 2018-2019 school year a needs assessment was prepared for distribution to all the parents that are a part of the P.S. 30M community (not only to the parents of students who are English Language Learners) through the Community Schools. These needs assessments were sent home in the home language that the parents have provided the school with. All letters that are sent home to parents are sent in English with a Spanish and/or Arabic translation at all times for those parents who require it. If the need arose that there were a parent who spoke another language not available at the school for written translation, an oral translation is provided. P.S. 30 will be working collaboratively with the community school event planner, Rose York the school psychologist, and Mrs. Cordero and Mrs. Robinson, school guidance counselors. These individuals will plan monthly workshops for parents by topic, based on the needs assessments of the parents. There are also family reading nights in which different activities are provided and planned based on the needs of the parents and students. The family reading nights are the parents and the ELL students of P.S. 30M. Teachers such as the ESL teacher and the coaches are invited to be a part of the presentation of these workshops as well. These workshops are approximately an hour to an hour and a half long. There is always 9  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities a Spanish and Arabic interpreter present for the parents who speak either language and when necessary as per parents request other language interpreters are present as well, although it has been rarely requested. Parental attendance at these meetings have been proven to be best during the evening hours. Therefore we expect that the bulk of the parents that will participate will be during the morning which is when these workshops are offered. An emphasis is placed on creating a strong home/school connection. Through out the course of the school year there have been many activities planned that promote the home/school connection. For example, Family Cookshop which is a nutrition education and food pantry program which meets monthly. With this activity, families work together with their children to learn about then prepare nutritional meals. The families also leave with food pantry items. These workshops and Spanish language interpretation. Notifications are send home in the families preferred language, as well as robo calls are also made to each family. A close partnership has been developed with the ENL teacher and Parent Coordinator in attempts to get as many families notified of the program as well as to get them to attend. This year there are plans to have an International Day where the schools different cultures and foods will be highlighted. Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. Professional Book Club AIS for lowest third Per Session - $2,000/ w fringe $4,623 Per Diem - $5,000/ w fringe $1, 653 n/a n/a Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits)  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other Parental Involvement - $1,500 Supplies - $3,866 Parent Meetings Consumable materials for students n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a 0 Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. n/a TOTAL $12,366 1  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 05 School Name Langston Hughes-Rafael Hernandez School Borough Manhattan School Number 030 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Teri Stinson Coach Nadine Ibroci ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Courtnee Young-O'Keefe Teacher/Subject Area Christine Moore SETTS Teacher/Subject Area Related-Service Provider Superintendent Assistant Principal Leonna Austin Coach Tonya Thomas School Counselor Ivette Cordero Parent Parent Coordinator Ms. Testamark Field Support Center Staff Member Other (Name and Title) Kathleen Brice/Secretary C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 0 1 2 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 2 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 256 2 Total number of ELLs 32 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 12.50%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 0 1 2 3 4 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? P.S. 30 uses a variety of formative assessment tools to asses the early literacy and math skills of the ELLs in our school. DRA is used to assess the reading levels of the students who are in grades K-5. DRA is done in grades K-2 three times a year, the beginning, midyear and at the end in order to measure student progress. In grades 3-5 it is done twice a year, beginning of the school year and at the end. DRA is used to measure literacy levels. The DRA results are used in order to group students during the literacy block for reading and writing. Some use the strategy for placing students in groups who are on the same DRA level, other teachers like to group their students with some being on grade level or higher with students who are below grade level. Results obtained are also analyzed and are used to see what skills the students are the weakest in. The skills are listed and small groups are formed in order to address th skills that the students are struggling with. When students are re-assessed using the same assessments it is noted if there has been growth or if the student has remained stagnant. The school also uses GoMath Benchmarks three times a year to assess math foundational skills. There are also the end of unit 3  exams, and Expeditionary Learning end of unit assessments. All data is then analyzed so that lessons are data driven The ENL teacher has adapted the Really Great Reading Program. This program includes an assessment that is administered by the ENL teacher at the beginning of the school year as well as throughout the . This assessment gives the ENL teacher information about what areas of literacy the ELLs are struggling in. The Really Great Reading assessment gives the ENL teacher insights about what vowels, sight words, inversions, fluency, etc. the ELLs are struggling with. Based on the results the ENL teacher groups the students in small groups based on the results and the areas of need. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? The structures that are in place have been created to support and advance the students academic achievement as well as acclimate the students to the school. There is Math and ELA tutoring groups before school, during school and after school that have been created to address the gaps the students have in their foundational skills. Data has been analyzed and utilized by the Data Team as well as classroom teacher and the ENL teacher in order to create the groups of students accordingly based on the curriculum and assessment results. Each teacher is required to have a data binder which tracks the students progress. Also, in order to create more parental participation, students progress is discussed with parents during Parental Engagement Tuesday's as well as with progress reports. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? P.S. 30 evaluates the success of the Freestanding ENL program by looking at the annual progress report. The English Language Learners are a subcategory on the progress report. This past school year, the ELLs showed a 82% improvement on the state exams. There is also a reading assessment (DRA) which is used for grades Kindergarten, First, Second and Third. This assessment allows for teachers to get a baseline of students reading abilities and deficits. All students in grades 3-5 are given the Ready exam in Math and ELA. These exams are also baseline assessments that assess students grade level ELA and Math ready skills. In addition to the assessments that the classroom teachers give, the ENL teacher gives students beginning, middle and end of the year assessments in phonemic awareness, as well as writing. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? The structures in the school have been proven successful and have moved students achievement. PS 30 follows the RTI model which provides various in classroom and out of classroom interventions. As previously stated students are grouped with tutors based on academic performance on these assessments. Recently, PS 30 and Marble Collegiate Church has formed a partnership in which trained tutors provided one on one instruction for select student. They use various data points when selecting the students. This year long program tracks the performance of the students and alters their instruction based on the data. Students are assessed using the running record format to see where the students are in the area of reading. Finally, PS30 uses the results from the NYS ELA and Math exams when planning instruction. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] P.S. 30M uses progress monitoring data to make educational decisions about changes that will take place in an ELLs goals, in their instruction, services as well as when a referral for special education when necessary. When the progress of an ELL is being monitored P.S. 30 takes into account the child's educational and language background. The data for the ELL that is being monitored is compared with levels demonstrated by peers that share the same culture, and experiential backgrounds who have received the same intervention. Data is also used to determine if the instructional core is ineffective as well as determining when it is necessary to adjust instruction for ELLs. The ELL is placed in different tiers as shown in the RTI framework for ELLs. If the student does not progress in Tier 1 instruction that they receive from their classroom teacher, they are then moved on to Tier II where they receive AIS small group instruction. Each Tier is alloted its own amount of time depending on the necessity of the ELL in the area of reading. The student is then placed in Tier III where they would receive more one to one intensive instruction if he/she does not show improvement in Tier II. If the students shows no improvement in Tier III the student is then referred to Special Education, after being placed in all the Tiers as well as evaluating the student in his/her native language. It is very important for P.S. 30 to understand where the student is in their L1 before planning any 4  interventions that the student may need. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. In an effort to evaluate the success of the ENL program various forms of data are used. The students NYS ELA and Math data is used, as well as the NYSELAT AND NYSITELL, and EDAT report. After analyzing the NYSESLAT and NYSITELL results, the performance levels are as follows: a. Nine students are at the entering level of proficiency. Three is in kinder, one in first grade, three in fourth and two in fifth. All of the students who are at the entering level of proficiency are newcomer students. These are students who have just entered the NYC public schools, with the exception of three who is within her first year. b. Four students are at the emerging level, one in kinder, two in second grade, and one in fifth grade. c. Ten students in grades two, three, four and fifth grades are at the the transitioning level. d. 5 students are at the expanding level and there are three in kinder, 1 on fourth and two in fifth grade. Finally there are 3 students who are at the commanding level of proficiency. The ELL Data Analysis Tool has also been used for different reasons. Primarily, for the creation of flexible student grouping as well as coming up with a group of targeted students and creating an action plan on how the teachers will work with the students to have them move proficiency levels as well as how they will access the curriculum. The ENL teacher will continue to share the results of the EDAT as it is important for the classroom teachers to use this information in their planning and instruction as well. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? Transparency is what has made the ENL program run efficiently. There have been charts created which place the ENL students into subcategories. For example, ELL's with IEP's, boys and girls, by teacher and proficiency level. These documents have been given to administration, the coaches as well as the classroom teachers that have particular students. It is important that this information is shared so that the teachers can plan accordingly to meet these students where they're at. It is also necessary for administration and the coaches to have this information for data purposes. The ENL teacher meets with teachers in the different grade cohorts to share this information and have discussions in regards to planning and instruction. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. P.S. 30 offers a freestanding English as a new language program only. This program provides instruction in English with home language support, emphasizing on English language acquisition. The ENL program at P.S. 30 will function as a standalone/integrated ENL program depending on the students proficiency level. During the stand alone ENL the instruction is to develop English language skills so that the students can be successful in their content area studies such as ELA and math. This will be delivered by our fully certified ENL teacher. The integrated ENL will be provided by our fully certified ENL teacher and the certified content area teacher . This method would include content area 5  instruction as well as developing language using ENL strategies. The students are grouped based on their grade, and the proficiency levels they obtained on the NYSESLAT and NYSITELL. There may be more than one grade such as two consecutive grades grouped together but share the same proficiency level such as entering. b. TBE program. If applicable. At this time this doesn't apply. c. DL program. If applicable. At this time this doesn't apply. 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? To ensure that all students receive their mandated instructional hours the ENL teacher works closely with the classroom teachers. We follow a specific schedule and work collaboratively with the ENL teacher when it comes to ensuring that the ELLs receive their mandated minutes. Classroom teachers are oriented at the beginning of every school year when they have been identified as being teachers who have ELLs in their classroom. The orientation consists of what the students ELL mandated are as per CR Part 154. Teachers are informed that students who are at the entering levels of proficiency will receive 360 minutes, (180 minutes of stand alone ENL and 180 minutes of integrated ENL) Students who are at the emerging level of proficiency will also receive 360 minutes per week ( 90 minutes with stand alone ENL, 180 minutes of integrated ENL and 90 additional minutes of either or. Students who are at the transitioning level of proficiency will receive 180 minutes( 90 minutes of ENL/ELA and 90 minutes of either standalone or integrated ENL. Those who are at the Expanding level will receive 180 minutes of ENL (180 minutes of integrated ENL/ELA or any other content area. Students who obtain the commanding level of proficiency will receive 90 minutes of transitioning support. This orientation is done so that the classroom teacher understands the importance of an ELL receiving the ESL services they are entitled to. When the ENL teacher plans to implement the integrated ENL several periods a week, she works with the classroom teacher to make sure that what the teacher plans on teaching for that week addresses the needs of the ELLs as well as there planning the differentiated instruction taking place. HLA (Home Language Arts) is provided by grouping students based on their Home Language. Additionally, the ENL teacher works with the STARS administrator to ensure accuracy in the mandates that are entered for each and every ELL student. The necessary reports are printed out in ATS to verify proficiency levels. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. P.S. 30M follows a curriculum map and pacing calendars in grades K-5 to ensure that the content areas of instruction are covered. These pacing calendars are generated around the current curriculum that is being following by P.S. 30 which is Core knowledge, for grades K-2, Expeditionary Learning for grades 3-5, and Go Math for the math curriculum. Teachers analyze data and create tiered groups in order to ensure that all lessons are differentiated. All lessons are aligned using the CCLS as well as the Home language progressions when planning lessons and units. Teachers make sure to change groups when students show progression in the content areas. Classroom teachers also collaborate with the ENL teacher in order to ensure that the ELLs are receiving proper differentiation according to their individual needs. Teachers use strategies such as summarizing, questioning, realia, TPR, story mapping, mental imagery, prior knowledge, vocabulary cards with pictures, glossaries in English and in Home language as well as graphic organizers in order to make content comprehensible. P.S. 30 also provides experiences for the ELLs through field trips that tie into lessons that are being taught. For example, the fourth grade was learning about Native Americans in October, so a trip was arranged to the Smithsonian's Native American Museum where topics that were discussed and learned about came to life. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? P.S. 30 only has a freestanding ESL program, we do not have a bilingual program. Students have been groups by their home language and instruction is given. Students will do read alouds and a times watch videos in their home languages. This is followed up by groups discussions and at times writing when appropriate. There are some language such as Wolof and Tigrinya that make instruction a bit challenging but more creative. When appropriate we have staff that provides native 6  language support when the need arises and the students are provided with bilingual glossaries. They are taught to use the glossaries to use during their daily instructional needs and so when testing comes around. End of the year evaluations, state exams, when available exams are offered in the students native language through the use of native language translators. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status At this time we have one SIFE students. Differentiated instruction in the following ways is how the curriculum will be accessed: the SIFE student will be provided with the extra support they need in order to get them on grade level. Besides ENL, the school would provide tutoring in the majority of all subject areas but especially focus on literacy and math during school hours and in an after school program Tuesday, Wednesdays and Thursdays. During school hours the Students are assessed using baseline assessments and benchmarks. The assessments are analyzed and skills that the student has proven to struggle with are taught. These students are assessed frequently in order to measure if there is any progress. If the student is not making any progress the plan is to include the student in our RTI prevention plan. The SIFE students will receive intensive one to one tutoring by an F status ENL teacher twice a week and progress will be measured on an ongoing basis. The SIFE students also participate in programs such as Fundations in order to receive the skills necessary that would prepare them for reading as well as the great leaps program. Any intense that are offered schoolwide, the SIFE's are included as well. ELLs who have been in the US schools less than three years who are newcomers and have an entering proficiency level will be serviced following an ENL stand alone model. These students will receive ENL classes during their mandated amount of time that is required as per their proficiency level on the NYSITELL and NYSESLAT. These Students who are in testing grades will participate in AIS tutoring one period a day during school hours to address both math and literacy skills. These students are also offered a placement in the afterschool program that is offered Tuesday, Wednesdays, and Thursday. If parents agree, these students receive extra help in literacy and math. One of the two is focused on per day of the afterschool. They also receive help with their daily homework assignments since the school acknowledges that the parents of most ELLs are unable to assist with Homework due to language barriers. During the regular school day ELLs are assisted by their classroom teachers by providing them with differentiated instruction on the subject area being taught in class. Also the ENL teacher collaborates with the classroom teacher in order to address the student needs while conducting Intergrated instruction. Both the ENL teacher and the classroom teacher will meet bi-weekly to discuss what they feel are the skills that should be taught while the child is being pull-out by the ENL teacher. Regular informal and formal assessments will be conducted in order to ensure and monitor student progress. With the New Comer ELL's a lot of work is done fostering relationships and having them become comfortable and acclimated to the school. This is done by pairing them with a buddy which is an ELL or other student. Also, meeting with the parent with the use of a translator if necessary to discuss any questions or concerns that they may have and to make sure they are informed about the programs that are offered in the school. ENL students in years 4-6 and longterm ELLs special needs also have the opportunity to participate in programs that are given through out the school year. These students depending on their needs are placed in programs such as "Wilson" to help them get on grade level and to reach proficiency. This would also apply to our newcomers. Students who have special needs are able to participate in all of the programs mentioned above as well as whenever needed they are provided with a one to one para that speaks their native language for any difficulties they may have. For our students who have reached commanding on the NYSESLAT the ENL teacher and the classroom teacher may meet to discuss any of the difficulties that the student may be displaying now that they no longer receive ENL. The ENL teacher on a regular basis may will use integrated instruction to assist the child and speak to the child and help him or her with they are doing at the moment and to measure any additional needs. In regards to differentiation, the commanding ENL student will still receive the necessary supports to access the curriculum when needed. Various vocabulary charts such as the Fryer model and or vocabulary cards including pictures. They will also be placed in flexible groupings based on data where they can be a lead 7  and/or have a buddy. This can strengthen skills that they have as well as serve as a review. These students as per request by the ENL teacher are placed in the extended time session in order to assist these kids with help in literacy and math. The ENL teacher also ensures that these students also receive the testing modifications that they are entitled to as per NYS all ELLs who reached commanding on the NYSESLAT are entitled to two additional years of the same testing modifications on all NYS assessments. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? All classrooms have a leveled library area in which all students including ELLs have the opportunity to read books that are on their independent reading levels. In the ENL room there are also books in various languages that the students have access to. In addition the school has purchased schoolwide membership to Reading A TO Z in which all students and staff have access to. This site provides leveled reading materials in Spanish as well as tracks their reading and provides assessments. Students have an assigned silent sustained reading period during every morning. Students also have access to classroom libraries that are targeted for reading for pleasure. Students are allowed to borrow books weekly. Because all of the newcomers at P.S. 30 are Spanish speakers these students also have access to books that are in their native language. Teachers also have computers in their classrooms that are accessible to ELLs. The computers provide interactive phonetic and reading programs that allow ELLs to hear proper pronunciation of letters, letter sounds, as well as vocabulary words that the teacher has selected for the individual students. Classrooms also provides mini listening centers where the students have access to books on CD. in reference to instructional strategies teachers use modeled writing and as well as vocabulary with picture cues to assist students. Classroom teachers have also been provided with various Professional Developments on using graphic organizers during instruction as well. Students independently listen to the books on the CD have an independent task that the teacher has selected and determined to be appropriate to the ELLs and SWDs needs. In addition to all of these strategies vocabulary cards with picture cues, graphic organizers, anchor charts, glossaries and thesaurus's are all used during instruction. All of these materials and strategies are planned collaboratively between the students classroom teachers and the ESL teacher to ensure that the ELLs are receiving age and grade level appropriate activities that will better suit their needs. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? P.S. 30M includes their ELLs-SWDs in all of their schoolwide curricular and instructional decisions. ELLs-SWDs are taught using the same curriculum as their monolingual peers except with differentiation. Classroom teachers use flexible grouping while planning their lessons. Flexible grouping is done to include all students in the classroom including ELLs-SWDs so that the students may be grouped according to their needs. ELLs may be better at math and in that case they may be grouped with a group that is working at the same math level as they are as shown on the benchmark assessments. Flexible grouping is also used for ELLs who need extra support and they are grouped with students who are at a higher level and can assist the ELLs with work completion as well as gaining confidence when participating in class. When an ELL-SWD with disability is referred for an evaluation the student is discussed by the schools, FST team. FST (Family Support Team) is a committee of teachers, attendance teacher, guidance counselor, school psychologist, and an administrator who discusses students who are at risk. There the students overall performance is discussed. If the students is thought to benefit from an actual evaluation, the student is evaluated by the school bilingual psychologist and when placement is being considered, the least restrictive environment is always the first choice considering the child is also in a second language acquisition process. The students are assessed three times a year, at the beginning, mid year and end of year to assess whether or not the student is achieving their IEP goals. If the IEP goals are being achieved then new goals are put in place for the student to strive to achieve. These students receive ENL services as they are mandated to receive by a fully licensed ESL teacher. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. The entire teaching faculty at P.S. 30M maintains a data binder in which 7 students are targeted for English Language Arts( social studies and science are embedded within the literacy) and 7 students are targeted for Math per class. These students are considered to be the lowest 1/3 in each classroom. These students are chosen based on data taken from prior statewide math and ELA exams. For the lower grades K-2 the students are targeted based on DRA/DWA and math assessments held at 8  the school wide such as math predictors and end of unit assessments. ELLs are included amongst these students . Once the students are targeted the teachers including the ENL teacher sets goals for each student. Based on those goals, skills are selected. Once those skills are in place these skills are taught on a weekly basis and are revised with time. Common assessments are held schoolwide in order to monitor student growth and to see what skills students are struggling with in order for those skills to be revisited if necessary. Targeted students are provided with one to one attention while conferencing they also receive AIS tutoring from certified teachers, who are trained in guided reading as well as with differentiating instruction. These groups may change as data is analyzed, and all the instruction offered during these intervention services are in English. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? Based on data and trends there will be new literacy and math programs for the ENL population. There is a plan to approach both of these subject areas using a project based model. Students will be grouped based on English Proficiency levels. There is a new incorporated violin program called in 2016-2017 OPUS 118 which teaches selected students how to play the violin. This teaches them discipline through the arts. Grades 3-5 are now departmentalized as of 2017-2018 which allows students to prepare for middle school as well as be completely immersed in one subject two periods in the morning and two in the afternoon, whether its literacy or math. This allows allows students to be completely immersed in the area of study since they move from one class to another and each classroom in decorated and prepared around the one subject area only. Also, placement of ENL students has changed where they will be placed predominantly in the the same grade level classrooms which will improve the Co teaching with the classroom teacher and the ENL teacher. Also new technologies will be used to access different modalities for example new Smartboards have recently been installed in the classrooms. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? At this time we do not have a bilingual program. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. P.S. 30M provides the ENL students with the opportunity to receive literacy and content specific curriculum through the arts. P.S. 30 hires outside certified ENL teachers who work with language and math skills through artisitic class such as puppetry, quilt making, movement and cooking. P.S. 30 also participates in federally funded program titled, The ALLL program whose services are provided by LEAP a non-profit organization. This program allows a fully certified teaching artist and the classroom teacher to collaborate and plan meaningful lessons based on the student needs. This program includes fieldtrips that enhances learning through experiences as well as allows classroom teacher to participate in outside PD in which they learn about the latest literacy strategies that are research based and proven to learn. This program also allows for measuring student progress by assessing students literacy skills at the beginning and end of the school year. At the end of each school year there is an ArtShowcase which the community, parents and other students are invited to.All the ELLs in P.S. 30 are afforded equal access to all school programs. There is an afterschool program that takes place Monday through Fridays between 2:30 and 5:30pm. During the afterschool students receive instruction in Literacy and Math, as well as individualized assistance with homework or any skills that students have shown to be struggling with. This is especially important for the ELLs whose parents do not speak English and can not assist their child at home with homework assignments. The afterschool program is taught by fully certified content area teachers, and all the students who are permitted by their parents attend. All ELLs are included in the afterschool program. Ms.O'Keefe the ENL teacher assesses students with an assessment from a supplemental reading program called, Really Great Reading. Students who are found to be at risk with reading in the areas of phonemic awareness, phonics, fluency and vocabulary are invited to attend a before school program in which small group instruction is geared toward addressing these areas of weaknesses. Parents are sent letters in their home language inviting them to allow their students to attend both the after school and before school program. In an effort to give all students and their families access to the school and its programs all notices are translated in the families home language. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. P.S. 30M students have access to a full computer lab with a computer teacher who is always present to assist with any questions or concerns. Classes are scheduled to attend the computer lab for weekly assessments, progress assessments, interactive computer classes, computer classes for basic typing skills and researching skills. There is also a complete library 9  with computers as well. Websites such as BrainPop are used because there are various modalities that can be used to assist in helping the students aquire the information. Foe example, video with sound as well as closed captions for students to access literacy through technology. There is also assessments on this site as well. The library provides students with access to books of all genres, magazines on research, dictionaries, computers with interactive computer programs, and most importantly a full time librarian who plans daily lesson plans for selected classes who come to work with her. The library as well as most classrooms also has books in Spanish for those students whose first language is Spanish and would like to take books home to read with their parent/guardian. P.S. 30 also has a complete science lab which is occupied by a full time science teacher. Most classes are scheduled to visit the library weekly and while there participate in hands on science experiments. New state of the art STEM labs have been received from a grant that was one from the Manhattan Borough President. With these STEM labs students will be able to access new technologies that will advance their science learning such as building robots through coding, and using videos to further natural science understandings. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Language is supported in the ENL program in P.S. 30 in many ways. Students receive stand alone and integrated ENL from a fully certified ENL teacher. The ENL teacher is fluent in Spanish and most of the ELLs in P.S. 30's first language is Spanish. Teacher uses their home language for all the newcomers who are new to the school and just adjusting. There are book baskets with books that are in Spanish. There are some books in French as well as they become available, however Mandigo, Tigrinya and Wolof is a more difficult language to access books in, therefore we don’t have any available at this time except for glossaries. The ENL teacher is always looking for resources in these Home languages as well. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. P.S. 30 follows all mandated services and to ensure that all services are meet there is a STARS administrator who ensure all programming is accurate and updated. Also, through CR 154 schedules the school Psychologist, administrators and teachers work in collaboration to ensure that all students are receiving the services that they are entitled to. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? P.S. 30M is a colocated building with 3 schools, a District 75 school as well as a charter school. The students at PS30 have access to a full computer lab with a computer teacher who is always present to assist with any questions or concerns. Only PS 30 has access to this lab. Classes are scheduled to attend the computer lab for weekly assessments, progress assessments, interactive computer classes, computer classes for basic typing skills and researching skills. There is also a complete library with computers as well which is only for PS 30 use. The library provides students with access to books of all genres, magazines on research, dictionaries, computers with intetractive computer programs, and most importantly a full time librarian who plans daily lesson plans for selected classes who come to work with her. The library as well as most classrooms also has books in Spanish for those students whose first language is Spanish and would like to take books home to read with their parent/guardian. P.S. 30 also has a complete science lab which is occupied by a full time science teacher. Most classes are scheduled to visit the library weekly and while there participate in hands on science experiments. The auditorium and, gym and cafeteria are shared spaces and are used through scheduling. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). Before the ENL student officially begins the school year at P.S. 30M they are orientated along with their parents as to what the school codes are when it comes to the school uniform, the daily schedule, the after school program when available, and what extra curricular activities are offered at the school. Every new ELL that arrives to P.S. 30 participates in a welcoming group that is led by the school guidance counselor. The guidance counselor and the ENL welcome the new students by receiving the child on their first day and escorting the child to their class as well. The guidance counselor does a selected amount of weeks of participation in what they call the "Welcome group" The students are pulled during their lunch time and sit and have lunch with the guidance counselor and there discuss any concerns or hardships they are having as new students who are not only new to the public school system but who are also learning a new language. 0  17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? At this time there are no language electives at PS 30M. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? No Dual language program at this time. Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? The P.S. 30M staff has one to one consultation meetings with the ENL teacher when they have doubts or questions about ELL teaching strategies and how to differentiate for ELLs in their classrooms. Also the ENL teacher provides the faculty including the assistant principals, Guidance counselors, and parent coordinator with mini workshops during common planning periods, lunch and learns and selected Mondays through out the school year. Since the ENL teacher follows the current core curriculum that has been selected for the school as an entry way of differentiating for the ELLs all the PD that is presented geared towards the ELLs is aligned to the Common Core standards. The ENL teacher attends most of the out of school PD that focuses on ENL related items, RTI, assessments, etc. and comes back to the school and teaches that faculty on the latest Professional development topics. Some of the topics for professional development are as follows: and the dates are tentative: 1. How to use the NYSESLAT results for grouping and driving small group instruction and the Really Great Reading Program 2. Stages of English language acquisition 3. How to plan differentiated instruction for the four levels of English literacy and five stages of language acquisition 4. How to differentiate a second language acquistion problem versus a learning disability 5. RTI for ELLs 6. Understanding the socio-cultural perspective and its implications for students with interrupted formal education 7. How to write language objectives when lesson planning. 8.Who is the Language Access Coordinator, what do they do and how can they help. P.S. 30 offers professional development that is aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards every Monday after school between 2:30-3:45. The professional development is required for all teachers of ELLs including the ENL teacher as well as content area teachers. Such Professional development topics aligned to common core in topics such as close reading, chunking texts, teaching kids skills such as answering text dependent questions, annotating text strategies, differentiating instruction for content areas such as math, social studies and science, small group instruction, phonemic awareness, phonics, vocabulary building strategies, etc. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. P.S. 30 dedicates a minimum of 15% of the professional development offered to language acquisition including a focus on what works best when co-teaching in terms of what strategies are successful. Included in the 15% will be professional development on content instruction for English Language Learners and how to align this instruction to the common core learning standards. The ENL teacher will attend professional development in which 50% is dedicated to language 1  acquisition and alignment with the common core instruction for English Language Learners. The ENL teacher will keep a Professional Development binder which includes PD's that were attended by herself as well as PD's that the staff received. This si done in order to keep accurate record of the mandated hours. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? At the very beginning in September for the first school open house, the ENL teacher invites the parents to attend an informative session in her room which allows parents of the ELLs to ask questions in order to clarify any questions they may have about the ENL program. In this session the ENL teacher expresses to parents what her goals are for the ELLs for the school year as well as her observations about individual students to individual parents. During the school year there are other opportunities to meet with parents such as the parent engagement Tuesdays which are held every Tuesday at the end of the school day, as well as the other parent teacher conference dates that are held through out the year. During the individual meetings that are set up on parent engagement Tuesdays or phone conferences with parents, the ENL teacher shares assessment results and language development needs for each student. If a one to one meeting is scheduled with a parent who speaks another language besides Spanish (there are teachers in P.S. 30 who speak Spanish) arrangements are made for an interpreter to come through the school level or through interpretation agencies contracted through the DOE such as "Big Word" or through the language access line where over the phone translation can be done. All notifications are sent home in the parents preferred language method. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Parents of ELLs are invited to attend all of the activities that are geared for the rest of the parents of P.S. 30. P.S. 30 offers family engagement nights in which parents can come and learn strategies that they can use at home for working with their children on literacy and math. ELL parents also participate in after school activities that orientate them about the community resources available to them such as the NY public library, ENL classes that are offered at no cost to the parents in the community through outside organizations, job fairs, help with situating their finances etc. All of these activities are offered in English as well as in the home language of the parents in the P.S. 30 community, trends have been Spanish. If an interpreter on the school level is not available, P.S. 30 has sought services from a DOE interpretation unit, "Big Word" as well as over the phone translation services. This year we hosted the first annual Hispanic Heritage assembly where the students participated in making decorations which where all of the Spanish speaking countries. There was also a performance by Los Pleneros which highlighted Puerto Rican culture. We are in the process of bringing programs to the school that have been requested by the families such as adult ESL classes as well as computer classes. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. PS30M was the recipient of a 2016-2017 and 2017-2018 Arts for All grant. This grant provided funds in the amount of $16,000 for schools to enter into a partnership with an Arts organization. PS30M chose to work with LEAP (Learning through an Expanded Arts Program). LEAP brings professional arts educators into schools to provide customized, innovative programs in visual arts, music, dance, film, and theater that are directly integrated into the academic curriculum. LEAP successfully uses the arts as a strategy to teach English language arts, math, science and social studies and addresses the varied learning styles of all students including special education, and English Language Learners. A LEAP teaching artist comes in twice a week for 30 sessions and integrates project based learning with social studies. The teaching artists works one on one with the classroom teacher designing lessons that incorporate all students so that they can access the curriculum in an interactive manner. In addition to the grant, the program also includes a parental engagement piece where the teaching artist conducts an information sessions for the parents to instruct them 2  on how the can create a home/school connection using the arts and literacy. LEAP will also host an in school assembly for the PS30 community titled: Dance around the world. 3 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Teri Stinson, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 4  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: 030 School DBN: 05M030 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Teri Stinson Title Principal Leonna Austin Assistant Principal Makeba Testamark Parent Coordinator Courtnee Young-O'Keefe ENL/Bilingual Teacher Parent Chrisitne Moore Teacher/Subject Area Teacher/Subject Area Tonya Thomas Nadine Ibroci Coach Coach Ivette Cordero School Counselor Kathleen Brice Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other School Secretary Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 06/22/17 06/22/17 06/22/17 06/22/17 06/22/17 06/22/17 06/22/17 06/22/17 6/22/17 5  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 05M030 School Name: Raphael Hernandez-Langston Hughes Superintendent: DanikaRux The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Courtnee Young-O'Keefe Language Access Coordinator No Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. Based on our demographics and ethnic data P.S. 30 has found that is necessarry that we identify our families in need of translation services vis a vis utilization of the Home Language Survey, emergency cards and ATS. Our school also interviews all parents at the time of registration and our ENL teacher meets with all new ELL students and parents. The language access coordinator also reviews the RAPL report before conducting a school wide survey which will help give more information about preferences that parents have. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. 6 Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Language At P.S. 30 the trend for all parents in reference to both written and oral communication is English, Spanish, Arabic and Mandingo. 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. The documents the school typically disseminates every year that require translation are letters informing parents of holidays and school closures. Letters informing parents of parent teacher conference dates and times. Monthly calendars that describe the school building events and family reading nights, notice letters announcing the afterschool program dates and times and letters about graduations. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to The school has face to face meetings with parents throughout the year provide interpretation service(s)? 7  during parent teacher conferences and family reading nights which is part of the community learning schools initiative. Parent engagement Tuesdays when teachers or parents set up meetings to discuss student progress. Also face to face meetings are held during IEP reviews and guidance counselors also call parents with concerns on behaviors, attendance, middle school articulation, incidents, accidents,etc. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) P.S. 30M provide each parents who require language assistance services with a copy of the Bill of Parent Rights which includes their rights regarding translation and intrepretation services. P.S 30 will also post a welcome poster at the school entrance informing parents of translation services that are available to them. This poster is available in different languages so that parents are aware of these services. The school safety plan will contain procedures that ensures that parents in need of language access services will know how to reach the schools administration with concerns they may have. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? 8  At the beginning of the school year the Language Access Coordinator as well as with the help of the parent coordinator will conduct a survey in order to gain information about a parents preference in written and oral language. This information will be besides what is asked of the parents on the Blue Emergency Cards and on page 2 of the HLIS form. The information received on all three will be consolidated into a summary sheet by the Language Access Coordinator and will be placed at the main office of the school as well as in the Parent Coordinators office as well as the Language Access Coordinator will have one at all times. Teachers will be given a summary sheet by class so that when there are written notices sent out as well as face to face meetings planned they may have a translation or translator in place as it is the right of the parent before hand. 9 
