 01M064 School Name: P.S. 064 ROBERT SIMON Principal: MARLON L. HOSANG 2018-19 CEP-CS 1  Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC)   Section 1: School Information Page School Information School Name: PS 64 Robert Simon School 310100010064 School Number (DBN): 01M064 BEDS Code: Grades Served: PK – 5 School Address: 600 East 6 Street, New York, NY 10009 Phone Number: 212-673-6510 Fax: 212-477-2369 School Contact Person: Marlon L. Hosang Email Address: mhosang@schools.nyc.gov Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: Marlon L. Hosang FarrahAlexander ZenaidaWatson SLT Chairperson: Giancarlo Intrabartolo Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Ilana Karpel Geographical District: 01 Superintendent’s Office Address: District Information Carry Chan Superintendent: 166 Essex Street cchan2@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 212-353-2948 Phone Number: 212-353-2945 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) FSC: Manhattan Executive Director: Yuet Chu Executive Director’s Office Address: 333 Seventh Avenue, New York, NY 10001 Executive Director’s Email Address: ychu@schools.nyc.gov   Phone Number: 646-470-0721 Fax: 917-339-1765   Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Marlon Hosang Vacant ZenaidaWatson LaQuanaCarter StefanieDiaz Desiree Rivera Manny Soto Donald Leroy MariaConcepcion *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Parent Parent Parent Parent Parent   Name AmandaRoccanova GiancarloIntrabartolo PamRosen AlyssaScherer ChristinaRipo Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Teacher Teacher Teacher Teacher Teacher Member/ Member/ Member/   Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with   the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement   Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? The mission of PS 64 is to work in partnership with students, families and the community to enable each child to reach their maximum potential through an interdisciplinary curriculum. Through the implementation of the visual and performing arts, students will build upon their intellectual curiosity to become risk takers. We also believe in fostering an appreciation of athletics and wellness by emphasizing sportsmanship, teamwork and healthy lifestyle habits.   2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. Departmentalization: We will departmentalize mathematics and humanities in grades 4 through 5. This approach will allow teachers to focus on and master fewer subjects. This will increase the level of expertise and allow teachers to develop a deeper understand of the content. Scheduling Changes: We will move to an A-G cycled schedule. This will allow teachers to have 4 periods of literacy and 3 periods of social studies per cycle during the humanities block. Houghton Mifflin: We also use Houghton Mifflin Social Studies Passport which allows all students to read grade level complex text. Instruction is centered around an anchor text. Students then use this content as the source for some writing units. The goal of this block is to enrich content vocabulary, engage in text based conversations and close reading. Handwriting: We have implemented a school wide handwriting initiative. All students in grades K-5 engage in daily handwriting practice through the Zaner program. The expectation is that all students graduate from P.S. 64 proficient in cursive handwriting. Math Stations: Classes engage in station work to reinforce and review math concepts. Intervention : We use the Success for All reading program which is aligned to the CCLS. We strategically plan the year to ensure that there is a 50/50 balance of informational and literary units. We have monthly SFA curriculum team meetings. We examine assessment results and engage in careful planning of text dependent questions to ensure that students are engaged in rigorous evidence based conversations about the text. We modify program tools to promote greater independence. Students are grouped according to their instructional level. PS 64 remains an elementary school with one of the highest percentage of SWD’s in the district. We identify students early on, provide the appropriate special services, which we believe leads to de-certification. Our school focused on improving the quality of our IEPs in the 2015-2016 school year. For the 2016-2017 school year there was an emphasis on aligning our student assessments/evaluations with the PLOP, as well as tracking progress toward reaching/fulfilling annual goals. Our RTI program began in the 2015-2016 school year and we continue to refine . Students identified as a year or more behind grade level would be pulled out daily for small group instruction. Instructional Focus: Our instructional focus for the 2017-2018 school year is to improve the quality of questioning and discussion techniques, as evidenced by an increase in teacher performance ratings to 95% Effective or Highly Effective for domain 3b: Questioning and Discussion Techniques. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. 0  Thirty-four percent of students are identified as SWDs. Students require customized instruction based on IEP PLOPs and annual goals. Special Education teachers focus on providing differentiated instruction to meet the individual needs and scaffold instruction to ensure students are given the tools to meet grade level standards. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. Area of Celebration: We made tremendous progress in the element of Collaborative Teachers and Effective School Leadership Areas of Focus: This year we will focus on Rigorous Instruction. 1  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 01M064 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration PK,0K,01,02,03,04,05 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 245 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 2 2 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 13 2 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 91.0% % Attendance Rate 86.1% % Reduced Lunch 2.0% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.0% 68.2% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 5.3% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 10.08 0% 14% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 32.6% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 76% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A YES N/A YES YES Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A YES N/A NO YES Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A YES N/A N/A YES High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 78 76 89.6% 4.9% 29.0% 20.8% 4.5% 1.2% 2 11% 3.8 32.6% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No N/A N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A NO N/A N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. In the Framework for Great Schools, the element of rigorous instruction is achieved through a coherent instructional guidance system that articulates the what and how of instruction. Assessments inform the instruction by creating thoughtful learning tasks based on the outcomes. The assessment results provide data which informs teacher plans on how to best scaffold instruction to promote higher level thinking and setting high expectations for all learners. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. For the 2018-2019 SY there will be a 10% increase in student performance in math for grades 3 to 5, as indicated in the 2019 New York State math exam. 3  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). The professional development plan for the 18/19 SY will include pds on different types of assessments (formative, summative and diagnostic). Next, teacher teams we take a look at analyzing and interpreting the data to inform our differentiated lesson plans. Finally, we will conduct pds on ways to differentiate content, process and product to meet the individual needs of our students. A 90-minute math block will be scheduled daily for all students in grades 1 through 5. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All teachers 9/5/18- 06/28/19 Coaches; RTI teacher; IEP teacher; AP All teachers 9/5/17- 06/28/19 Coaches; RTI teacher; IEP teacher; AP Professional development plan will reflect a series of parent engagement workshops on NGLS in mathematics and how to support at home. PS 64 Families 9/5/18- 06/28/19 Coaches; RTI teacher; IEP teacher; AP 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Assessment results and data trends will be shared with families during monthly SLT meetings. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. To achieve this annual goal we have identified and aligned resources in the following manner: Human Resources: 1. Assistant Principal (FSF, Title I) 4  2. Literacy Coach (FSF, Title I) F-Status Early Childhood Instructional Specialist (FSF, Title I) 3. IEP Teacher (FSF) 4. Response to Intervention Teacher (FSF, Title I) Instructional Resources: 1. Purchase new social studies series with trade books for grades 1-5. (FSF, NYSTYL) Schedule Adjustments: Move to an A-G day schedule to allow more time for humanities. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A X C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, there will be a 10% increase in students performance as evidenced by formal and informal assessments. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) Unit tests, periodic assessments Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 5  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? Whereas the Framework for Great Schools identifies a supportive environment as an essential component to raising student achievement, the following areas of strength have been identified:  Student safety o Students meet weekly in their classrooms for “class council,” which provides a forum for students to discuss their successes and their concerns that have arisen throughout the week o A “round table” is designated in each classroom, where the students can go to resolve minor conflicts using “I messages” and the “Peace Path” o Fifth grade students participate in the safety patrol which takes place during lunch and recess. During this time, they monitor student behavior and ensure that students are playing in a safe manner o There have been a minimal amount of student suspensions, which demonstrates positive student behavior school wide o We have newly installed alarms on all exit doors which prevents students from leaving the building unsupervised o Students, teachers, and staff have been trained in group response protocols  Student support o Guidance counselor provides both mandated and at-risk counseling services to individual students as well as small groups o School psychologist and school social worker support students that are referred as well as students with IEPs o RtI teacher provides push-in and pull-out services for at risk students o ICT class on every grade  Student rigor o Teachers differentiate for all levels of learning and identify multiple entry points o Teachers create math menus for students to provide more challenging activities o During SFA students have the opportunity to be part of a reading group that is above grade level o Partnerships are thoughtfully planned, allowing students that are struggling to work with students that are on or above grade level  Needs o Based on number of OORS reports in category A24, we have determined a need to create conflict awareness and implementation of restorative practices. Part 2 – Annual Goal 6  Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. For the 2018-2019 school year there will be a 13% increase, from 67% to city average of 80%, in "peer support for academic work" as indicated in the 2018-2019 School Quality Guide. For the 2018-2019 school year there will be a 10% increase, from 80% to the district average of 9%, in the category "social-emotional" in the 2018-2019 School Quality Guide. 7  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Tutoring Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? students in temporary housing 09/06/17- 06/28/18 Guidance Counselor Teacher teams focus on Diversity Initiative in alignment with D1 priority. All students 09/06/17- all teachers Form book clubs to gain insight and enhanced empathy with student population. 06/28/18 all students 09/06/17- all teachers 06/28/18 Solutions teams will meet monthly to review class council meeting data and make revisions as necessary. All students 9/7/2017 - 06/28/2018 all staff members 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Principal Weekly Message will share progress with families. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. We strategically budget our monies to include funding for the following personnel: ● Full Time Guidance counselor We will invest in the following instructional resources: Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. ● SFA Getting along together X X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other 8  Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Class Council Meeting Data will be analyzed monthly and OORS reports will be analyzed quarterly. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. SFA Member Center & OORS management system Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 9  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Based on our 2018 PPO and QR feedback we will continue to refine our teacher team work which will focus on instructional coherence and building teacher capacity to lead PLCs. The 2017-18 School Quality Guide shows that the school is .55 above the district average and .65 above the city average in the area of Collaborative Teachers. There will be a specific concentration on inter visitations for the 18-19 SY. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. For the 2018-2019 school year, 100% of teaching staff will have presented at a PLC meeting and participated in an inter-visitation within the district. 0  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? A rotating schedule of PLC facilitators will be set so all teachers are slated to lead a PLO. All Teachers 10/2018 Instructional Cabinet All teachers will attend attend an inter visitation in another D1 school to learn best practices. All Teachers 09/05/18- 06/28/19 All Teachers 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. A monthly update/newsletter will be shared with families. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. We strategically budget our monies to include funding for the following personnel: Instructional Specialist Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By November 2018 35% of teachers will have led a professional development session or facilitated a PLC meeting. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. PD Plan & Observation 1  Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. According to the 2017-18 School Quality Guide, PS 64 is 16% above the district average and 33% above the city average in this area. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. For the 2018-2019 school year, school leaders will meet monthly with PENCIL partners in order to strategically plan for and maintain a social media profile in order to brand school for music and arts and increase student enrollment. 3  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Instructional coaches will facilitate professional developments sessions on portfolio development. Instructional coaches will provide professional development on student self assessment. All Teachers 10/2017 Instructional Cabinet All Teachers 09/2017 Instructional Cabinet Teachers will facilitate a PLOs related to student led conferences. All Teachers 9/8/2017- 6/28/2018 Teachers 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Families will be the target audience for launch of new PS 64 Face Book page. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Instructional cabinet meet monthly with PENCIL partners. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By March 2018, 100% of staff members will have facilitated student led conferences in grades 2-5. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. 4  Observation Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 5  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Only 35% of families completed the Learning Environment Survey for the 2016-2017 school year. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. For the 2018-2019 school year, there will be a 10% increase, from 40% to 50%, in the number of families completing the Learning Environment Survey. 6  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Computer stations will be available during parent-teacher conferences for families to complete the survey online. Weekly phone blasts will be sent to remind families of completing the Learning Environment Survey. The Principal's Weekly newsletter will remind families of completing the Learning Environment Survey. All Parents Spring 2019 Parent Coordinator All Parents Spring 2019 School Secretary All Parents Spring 2019 Principal 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. PS 64 has been cited for strong CBO partnerships. The CBO Educational Alliance, which provides after school programs for students, has identified the area of Family Engagement to be a priority for the 18-19 school year and will provide additional support to help the school achieve this goal. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. The Parent Coordinator, Educational Alliance director and program coordinator, PTA officers, and school staff will each perform a critical function in attaining this goal. Parent Coordinator will facilitate monthly workshops in this area. The principal will provide additional opportunities for family engagement through monthly coffee hours. Staff will meet or speak via phone with families on Tuesdays during the designated time for family engagement and other times, as necessary. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 7  The school will use attendance at fall parent teacher conferences, logs of communication during Tuesday family engagement time, attendance at monthly PTA meetings, parent workshops and principal coffee hours, and informal surveys as mid point benchmarks in February 2019 to assess progress towards meeting the goal. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. DOE provided statistical updates. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 8  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Mathematics Science Social Studies At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) SFA, Fundations, Wilson, Great Leaps, Guided Reading Small guided math groups & Front Row Repeated readings, guided readings of grade level text Repeated readings, guided readings of grade level text N/A Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Students reading 1 or more years below grade level standards according to F&P running records. Students 1 or more years below grade level as evidenced by ECAM. Students not meeting grade level standards in science Students not meeting grade level standards in social studies Based on referrals to PPT students will be identified for At Risk related services Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Small group and one-to-one during the literacy/SS block Small group during Math block Small group Small group Small group and one-to-one 4 times a week in 20-minute interval for RTI 4 times a week in 20-minute interval for RTI during school day 9  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 63 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. Family Worker, Parent Coordinator & Guidance Counselor will routinely reach out to families. Guidance Counselor will service students in an At-Risk capacity. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 0  N/A 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. 8,770 1  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. ● We have partnerships with several universities that place their student teachers at PS 64. They then have the opportunity to train with our teachers, attend our professional development activities and work with students. Once they complete their program they are invited to substitute and or interview for a full time teaching position. ● We also have a hiring committee that goes through resumes and selects potential candidates. Questions are selected and asked at the interview. ● Teachers do a demo lesson. ● Assignments are determined by license area first. Then we look at area of expertise and grade level preference for each of our staff members to determine the assignment. ● To retain our teachers and ensure that they are highly qualified we provide differentiated professional development opportunities. We have an instructional coach and early childhood specialist that works alongside teachers to provide supports, model lessons, conduct grade level meetings, modify curriculum and develop assessments. Each year a small group of teachers are selected to attend an out of state conference to enhance their best teaching practices. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). ● Each school year we conduct a needs assessment to determine areas of focus and interest based on a wide array of data (student performance results, teacher feedback, Advance data, QR & PPO feedback). ● Based on the results of our needs assessment we develop an instructional focus, school wide goals, and a professional learning plan for the entire school year. ● Once the professional learning plan is completed the Principal’s cabinet schedules and implements professional development offering for the year. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. 2  n/a 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). n/a Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). Our PK Social Worker and staff from Partnership with Children meet with prospective families to review the application and registration process for the following school year. We also attend the yearly district wide PK fair to inform families and the community of our early childhood programs. Teachers will participate in an Educational Alliance Pyramid Model training for social emotional growth. We've also added an additional Educational Alliance Head Start classroom to build our base of transitioning students to P.S. 64. PK teachers are integral members of our vertical teacher teams. Teachers plan units that build upon and spiral from one grade to the other. This allows for the seamless transition for students moving from one grade to the other. All school wide professional developments offerings include our PK teachers. P.S 64 also offers free after school for our PK students. 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. All assessments are designed and aligned to achieve the goal of increasing student achievement. Assessment is central to our daily practice. Data is triangulated to drive instructional decisions and student groupings. We use assessment tools to help us track our data such as Google docs, Member Center, STARS, SESIS. The principal’s cabinet selects school wide assessments to track and monitor student progress. Teachers meet during weekly grade level meetings to look at student work, develop pre and post assessments, performance tasks and goal specific conference sheets to monitor student progress. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. 3  Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Column B Verify with an (X) Section Reference(s) Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 161,059.00 111,135.00 0 0 1,707,812.00 X X X Section 5a-e Section 5a-e Section 5a-e 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs 4   Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 5  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent Involvement Policy (PIP) Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. PS 64, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. P.S. 64, will support parents and families of Title I students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; Parental Involvement and School Quality 6  PS. 64's Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., NCLB/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under theElementary and Secondary Education Act. 7  ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; P.S. 64 will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) PS 64 in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments.ts. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; 8  ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act. (NCLB) Act; Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; Provide general support to parents by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; 9  ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Every Student Succeeds Act.Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; III. Student Responsibilities P.S. 64 Student Responsibilities: ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 0  Addendum: Community School Partnerships Directions: The Community School (CS) strategy is directly aligned to the Framework for Great Schools. Community Schools bring schools and community partners together and integrate academics, health, youth development, and family engagement to provide students with the tools and opportunities they need to succeed. The Core Services in Community Schools are Expanded Learning Time (ELT), Attendance Supports, Family Engagement, and Health & Wellness. Part 1 – Community School Partnerships Goal(s) How is the CS strategy integrated into academic instruction at your school, and what impact has it had on student academic outcomes? Our school has well-established structures to ensure alignment of all stakeholders in working to achieve desired results. The CSD and key CBO partners regularly attend SLT meetings along with teachers and parents to determine school goals and programs, in addition to PTA meetings as a joint effort to involve parents and families throughout the planning process. We coordinate monthly CS Planning Team Meetings which include sub-committees that support our attendance intervention, building school community, and planning family engagement events. These teams are responsible for implementation and consist of CBO Leadership, CSD, PS64 teachers and school administration. The meeting begins with each committee chair reporting to the group as to progress and challenges they are facing. The group then addresses new issues and initiatives. They determine the timeline and responsibilities going forward with approval from Principal Hosang. CBO staff provides overlapping services during the school day in order to support during academic instruction. This additional support begins with the lunch period and continues throughout the school day to support during the social emotional learning block (Getting Along Together), special subjects, and the literacy learning block (Success For All). This provides more student supervision, additional support for individualized small group learning, and collaborative leadership. Indicate the summative goal(s) of the Community School for the 2018-19 school year. Be sure to construct the goal to be SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Realistic, and Time-bound. 1. Reduce Chronic Absenteeism by 2% 2. By November 2018 have all school administration and CBO Staff trained in RULER 3. Engage at least 60% of parents into school based activities 4. Provide extra student support through Success Mentors year round Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Community School Annual Goal(s): How will achieving your Community School Goal(s)--in Expanded Learning Time (ELT), Attendance Supports, Family Engagement, and Health & Wellness--support your academic goals for students? Reaching our identified goals will ensure students are attending school on a regular basis, which will increase their overall school performance. Educational Alliance will ensure parents and families are informed and aware of the additional support and resources that are offered through our programming. Expanded Education will aim to strengthen academic support, talent development opportunities and implement SEL strategies for all students. With increased attendance, increased performance in class and parents/families supporting students, we hope academic goals will be met. Part 2 – Community School Partnerships Core Services Action Plan Part 2a. Identify the Community-based Organization (CBO) partnerships that you will develop in ELT, Attendance Supports, Family Engagement, and Health & Wellness, their target student population(s), and scope of the services 1  provided. As well as supporting schools’ supportive environment and attendance work, CBOs should be helping to support your school’s instructional focus. CBO Partnership Attendance Target Population All students K-5 Health and Wellness All students K-5 Expanded Learning Time All students K-5 Family Engagement All students K-5 Scope of Service SY18-19 SMART Goal Increased attendance by June 2018 Increased mental health support and improved student functioning by June 2018 Integrated professional development opportunities for Lead CBO and school administration. Increase learning time by 25% Increased family/parent literacy Lead CBO, Counselor, SFA Committee- Collaboration, success mentoring, home visits, SFA attendance meetings & class attendance incentives created Lead CBO- Social emotional learning groups, short terms counseling, success mentoring, and mental health crisis support Lead CBO, Expand Ed (TASC)- Offer enrichment programs that align with STEM. Provide students with exposure to arts and culture. Facilitate training opportunities for staff and school administration. Lead CBO/PTA- Offer Adult ED classes in areas such as ESL & Parenting. Support parents in obtaining their GED & ESL. Part 3 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 3a. Indicate resources your Community Partnership will leverage to achieve your summative SMART goal(s) and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. The Community Schools Partnership will leverage funding from the Community Schools Budget, Expanded Education grant, and PTA fundraising to support our annual goals. 2  Part 3b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) Title I SWP Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside X 21st Century SIG Grant School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 3c. Describe how the school will partner with the Lead CBO to do the following: 1. Community Schools are expected to partner with a community-based partner organization (CBO) and together with members of the School Leadership Team, hire a Community School Director. The Director will lead implementation of the asset and needs assessment process, and other critically important coordinating activities. Indicate how you will leverage this aspect of the work. Community Schools are expected to personalize the needs of all students, through strategic programming and services, as determined by the asset and needs assessment, and must also offer Expanded Learning Time (ELT) and mental health programming. In completing this section, ensure that you think about how: (1) the right services are provided to the right students and families at the right time; and (2) how you will seamlessly coordinate services with instructional programming happening throughout and outside of the school day. Indicate how you will implement this work, and describe other programming you anticipate to be in place to strengthen this initiative. Community Schools are expected to emerge as Partnership Schools, which are places where parents and families feel welcome, actively participate in the conversation and decision-making around the renewal of their schools, and have many opportunities to advocate for their children. Monthly meetings and Community School Forums engaging families and community stakeholders will be a critical part of this family engagement strategy. Describe how you will implement this aspect of the work. Community School Principals are expected to meet on a weekly basis with their Community School Director, select Assistant Principals, key staff, and other CBOs, to analyze trends in data and case manage individual students. Data tools – including the New Visions Data Sorter - and training will be available for schools to use. Indicate how you will implement this aspect of the work. 2. 3. 4. 1. PS64 in collaboration with the lead CBO, Educational Alliance, has hired a Community School Director. The Director will assist administration in the implementation of community school's four main pillars while conducting evidence based assessment tools to track progress and success of students through their various partnerships and programs. The CBO leadership staff will be involved in attendance meetings, school based support team meetings, building council meetings and various meetings that enhance the school community and school culture. 2. The school and lead CBO support students and families facing poverty, homelessness, chronic absenteeism and language barriers. The school has identified the need for Social Emotional Learning for all students and there for is implementing the “Getting Along Together” curriculum (a social problem-solving program). CBO staff will support during that learning block and support students one on one or in small learning groups. Additionally, the lead CBO will train all CBO Staff and school administration in the RULER model from Yale University. RULER is an acronym that stands for Recognizing, Understanding, Labeling, Expressing and Regulating emotions. We plan to utilize Success Mentors in targeting all students to ensure we meet their individual needs. Success Mentors and CBO leadership will review student progress weekly and make the appropriate referrals and recommendations for services. 3. Monthly Meetings will be held with parents and families to: review and refine strategic plan, identify challenges and solutions, assess the effectiveness of resources, identify new partners and resources and assess effectiveness of various school supports. Teachers, counselors and other school staff will present issues and work with CBO planning 3  team. CBO staff, school administration, parents, and PTA members will also gather monthly for SLT (school leadership team) meetings to plan school wide community events and initiatives. 4. School leadership and CS Team plan to meet weekly and review identified goals, student assessments, and successes, along with strategic planning to further goals. The CSD will generate relevant information pulled from the Data Sorter to use during meetings. All relevant staff will have been trained in specified Data Tools. Part 4 – Community School Partnerships Oversight Part 4a. Key Staff and Partners 1. Name and describe the scope of involvement of all community partners working in the school (include partners supporting ELT, counseling, enrichment, etc.) 2. Name the members of your Community School Team and how meetings will be organized and structured to engage all stakeholders and be focused on results. 3. Explain data strategies including the use of the data sorter, and steps that the school will take to ensure that the appropriate interventions are provided to the right students 1. Expanded Education (TASC): to strengthen academic support, talent development opportunities and PD opportunities for staff & school administration 2. Student Tutoring (ROSS): bimonthly volunteer tutors from our corporate donor will support during homework help periods during afterschool day 3. Counseling for students (Educational Alliance): continue providing therapy, small social learning groups, referrals, evaluations, and SEL trainings for families & staff 4. Health Services for Students (Ryan-Nena): to extend hours of clinic and accessibility for families 5. Dance to Unite: provide dance classes that infuse an educational component that celebrates cultural diversity, promoting unity and peace. 6. Parent education, College and Career Counseling (BMCC): to reach more parents in sustained ESL and Literacy classes 7. Life Skills (Ed Alliance Sister Program): implement a basic life skills curriculum to prepare students to become fully participating members of their communities Community School Team: School Principal, Assistant Principal, Community School Director (Ed Alliance), After School/BGCA Director (Ed Alliance), Program Coordinator(Ed Alliance), Parent Coordinator, PTA President, Academic Specialist/Success Mentor ( PS64 Teacher) , and Science Teacher/Success Mentor (PS64 Teacher) CS Attendance Team/SFA Committee will strategically use the New Visions Student Data Sorter to drive weekly attendance meetings and provide tactical interventions using NYCDOE’s “Three Tiered/Intervention Model to strategically combat chronic absence. The Data Sorter allows partners to identify chronically absent students and provide interventions to improve overall attendance. The school targets and assigns community-based services to align and support each student’s specific need, as well as providing student incentives for exemplary attendance and establish an engaging and fun school climate for children. Part 4b. Indicate resources needed including human resources, instructional resources, and schedule adjustments to implement the Community School program. 4  Resources that are needed would include gaining access to best practice resources available in the Community Schools network that support our delivery of the 4 core pillars of the Community School Initiative. Additionally, attending community schools convenings in order to collaborate with partner schools and develop new skills to bring back to our sites. Additionally, relevant professional development and training opportunities for CBO staff and Sucess Mentors. Part 4c. Timeline for implementation and completion, including start and end dates. The implementation of these services will begin at the beginning of the school. Staff training and orientation will be held in early September and a CS Welcome Back Event will held in mid-September to unite all CBO staff and PS64 Administration. Services are in place to run throughout the year with teams set up within the 4 core pillars, meeting on a weekly and monthly basis - providing updates and assessments. A calendar of events and specified family engagement nights will happen throughout the year as well and planned in conjunction with the PTA. SLT team will meet monthly to assess the broader scope of services including Lead CBO (Educational Alliance) participation. CS team meetings will be held to connect with other CBOs through Ed Alliance regarding best practices and growth. These services will work through till the end of June 2018. Part 4d. Mental Health Work Plan Separate from this S/CEP, schools will complete a Mental Health Work Plan that will become an addendum to this document. 5  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 01 School Name P.S. 064 Borough Manhattan School Number 64 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Marlon L. Hosang Coach Amy Stone ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Martin Perl Teacher/Subject Area Alyssa Leone/RTI Teacher/Subject Area N/A Related-Service Provider N/A Superintendent N/A Assistant Principal Daniela D'Arcangelo Coach Judy Golubchick School Counselor N/A Parent Zenaida Watson Parent Coordinator Gladys Concepcion Field Support Center Staff Member N/A Other (Name and Title) N/A C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 0 1 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 206 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] Total number of ELLs 0 0 3 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 1.46% 6  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 1 2 3 4 0 0 0 0 0 0 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? The school uses Success for All (SFA) assessments for data collection, along with Fountas & Pinnell to guide instructional planning. The school also uses the following assessments: SOLO, EPAL, MOSL Baseline Assessments, Periodic Assessments, Fast Track Phonics, and teacher created assessments. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? All students are given running records throughout the school year using Fountas and Pinnell for Measure of Student Learning (MOSL) Baseline and End of Year Assessments. Success for All (SFA) is the school-wide reading program that is implemented year round. The assessments for the program are Roots and KinderCorner. Additionally, the school assesses early literacy skills using SOLO (Structured Oral Language Observation), Fast Track Phonics for 1st and 2nd grade. All the data is analyzed and is used to properly group students for the SFA Reading block. Students are assessed every 8 weeks and new groupings are formed to ensure that each student is being instructed according to their individual reading level. 7  3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? The school uses Success for All (SFA), NYSESLAT, the New York State Tests in English Language Arts, Math and Grade 4 Science, and MOSL Baseline Assessments and End of Year Assessments, Periodic Assessments 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? We analyze the data of teacher created assessments, as well as New York State tests. Additionally, we measure student success by informal assessments, observing students in their classrooms, and their basic interpersonal communication skills. We use data from these year round assessments to mark the growth of our students, and then use this data to make informed decisions regarding our instructional practices. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] The school follows the Response to Intervention Framework. ELLs receive tiered RTI services based on summative assessments and formative assessments and teacher observation. The first step is to provide interventions within the classroom such as small group instruction, tutoring and differentiated assignments and methods of presentation. Success for All (SFA) small group, differentiated instruction, and relevant data is reviewed every 8 weeks. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. Data assessments from the NYSESLAT, New York State ELA, Math grades 3-5, and the New York State grade 4 Science test, as well as MOSL Beginning and End of Year Assessments are used to evaluate and inform ELL programs. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? Information is disseminated at weekly grade level meetings, cross grade meetings, weekly staff meetings, as well as Professional Development meetings. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. Students are grouped according to language proficiency and grade level. Students are served in a heterogeneous integrated program model by a certified ENL teacher. b. TBE program. If applicable. N/A c. DL program. If applicable. N/A 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? 8  All English language learners receive the New York State mandated number of minutes for acquiring English language skills by a certified ENL teacher per the results of the most recent NYSITELL or NYSESLAT scores. This data is reviewed by the ENL teacher to ensure that mandated minutes are met. The required number of minutes is reflected in STARS classroom scheduling, and this confirms the required number of ENL weekly minutes of instruction. Students are heterogeneously grouped by grade and level of English proficiency. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. English Language Arts (ELA), Mathematics, Social Studies, and Science are all delivered in English in a co-teaching setting. Differentiated instruction is provided to all English language learners through various methods, which makes content comprehensible, and fosters language development. Objectives meet the requirements of the Common Core Learning Standards. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? English language learners whose home language is Spanish are administered the Spanish LAB . During the school year, ELLs are evaluated in their home language with teacher created assessments, or translations of Periodic Assessments. Bilingual staff members assist in assessing ELLs in their home language. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status a. Students with Interrupted Formal Education (SIFE) are given additional support based on the individual needs of the student. We have several New York Cares volunteers that work one-to-one with students. b. English language learners in the US for less than three years receive the same Reading Workshop, Writing Workshop, and testing preparation as main streamed students in their grade because they are required to take the math and science tests. The newcomers are constantly observed and conference notes are kept on each individual student and reviewed by the ENL teacher and the classroom teacher. c. Developing ELLs are provided with small group instruction to target their specific needs. Prior assessment data is analyzed to determine their academic requirements. When students are receiving ELL services for 4 to 6 years, extensive academic intervention is provided. d. Long-term ELLs who have received English as a new language for 7 years or more. The school offers academic intervention for these students. The school does not presently have any Long-Term ELLs. Services to long-term ELLs fall into a similar category as Services provided for Students with Interrupted Formal Education. These students are also part of the academic intervention programs for identified at risk students. A focus on literacy development, explicit vocabulary instruction, sentence analysis, and scaffolding activities are implemented. e. Former ELLs receive 90 minutes weekly of for two years after passing the NYSESLAT 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? The ENL Teacher and classroom teachers meet to discuss the unique needs of ELLs, who also might have special academic/emotional disabilities that might impact their English language acquisition. Individually tailored lessons for these students include small group instruction provided by means of parallel, alternative, and station teaching. Other strategies include differentiated graphic organizers, and sentence frames to help students focus. Collaborative student discussions are facilitated with the use of conversational prompts to improve comprehension, as well as speaking and listening skills. 9  7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? Based on students' IEPs, all instruction is tailored to meet the needs of our diverse students. Per the 2017-2018 ELL Policy and Reference Guide, ELLs who are also students with disabilities (SWD) receive accommodations that apply to both ELLs and SWDs, as appropriate. Response to Intervention (RTI) approaches are applied to ELL students who enter with lower levels of proficiency in the home language, or if anticipated progress is not noted after a reasonable time period. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. The school-wide reading intervention program, Success for All (SFA), has an intervention component that is in place. The students are assessed every eight weeks and then regrouped according to instructional level. Students that do not make the expected amount of progress will be referred for RTI services. This will ensure that this subgroup gets the additional support needed to be successful in the classroom. The school offers a diverse range of intervention services. Students receive academic intervention services during school-wide AIS small group instruction. Classroom teachers and the ENL teacher meet to apprise on another regarding the specific needs and progress of each English language learner. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? Based on observation and feedback from ELLs and teachers, the school will seek to create more opportunities for newly admitted English language learners to learn more about positive ways to adapt to the school's culture, as well as integrating into a new language, country, and customs. One of the ways this will be accomplished is with the assistance of student partners/mentors, and the use of diverse multicultural literature in small student book clubs. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? N/A 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. ELLs are given the same access to all school programs. We are dedicated to providing an education that is rich, rigorous, and well rounded. Our students come from vastly diverse cultural backgrounds. Besides academics, ELL students are included in all enrichment activities. All students, including ELLs, participate in a Rosie's Kids, Project News, New York Cares projects in addition to Dance, Art, Physical Education classes. Students also go on field trips to museums, attend plays, and dance performances. ELL students are given all supports necessary for them to participate in all activities. Many of the English language learners also attend the Educational Alliance After School program which is housed in the school building. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. The ENL classroom has many leveled books, and a selection of books on CDs. It also includes a Photo Library, Bilingual books and Glossaries, Picture Dictionaries, as well as laptops to engage and assist English language learners improve their English skills. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Home language support is given to ELLs in the following ways: Bilingual glossaries, and bilingual dictionaries are available. When possible, periodic assessments, MOSL tests, and New York State tests are given in translated versions. Oral translation is provided to students for low incident languages for which there is no written translation provided by the New York State Department of Education. Bilingual staff and more advanced ELLs mentor beginner ELLs in a supportive manner in their home language. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. The school carefully reviews relevant ATS reports such as student class rosters and ages in order to create and schedule appropriate grade level and age groupings for ENL instruction. 0  15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? The school shares a building with another elementary school, as well as a middle school. The shared school building library is a useful resource filled with books, dictionaries, and computers for research. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). New English language learners are assigned classroom buddies when they are admitted to the school. They are also supported by other students that might speak their home language. The Parent Coordinator, who is bilingual in English and Spanish, encourages new students to participate in programs created for new ELLs. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? No language electives are offered to any students. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? N/A Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? The entire school faculty, including the ENL teacher will attend weekly in-school staff development, in addition to off-site workshops and trainings throughout the school year. The ENL teacher will continue to attend professional development workshops offered by organizations such as NYTESOL and TESOL, as well as workshops offered by the Manhattan Field Support Office, the New York City Department of Education office of English Language Learners (DELLS), and the United Federation of Teachers (UFT). These workshops provided by the Manhattan Borough Field Support Center specifically focus on developing best practices for ELLs and the Common Core Standards. This information is then distributed to all classroom teachers of English language learners to better provide support while maintaining rigorous content and language demands. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. The school provides professional development to all teachers that specifically addresses the needs of English language learners. The school administration adheres to CR Part 154, 15% of total hours of ELL-specific PD for all teachers, and 50% total hours for ELL-specific PD for ENL teachers. Based on our student data and teacher surveys, we have identified the need to increase our teachers' ability to analyze data and to use it to develop differentiated lessons and student goals with time frames. Teachers have requested workshops on differentiating instruction as well as the workshops on: conferencing, and running records. The literacy coach meets weekly with each grade level during planning. Recognizing a need to help our students to improve in their critical analysis, inference skills, and vocabulary development, teachers have also requested professional development to help them formulate higher order thinking questions, plan thematically across all curricular areas, and develop more inquiry based and school wide projects, like our annual Social Studies Content fair. Teachers will be provided 1  with professional development to support the understanding of the Language Allocation Policy (LAP). The LAP team works with the school to ensure that the foundations of the LAP policy are upheld and incorporated into daily classroom instruction. All teachers meet with the literacy coach and the instructional specialists weekly for grade level meetings during their prep. Copies of Professional Development Agendas, and attendance sheets are kept on file in the school. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? In addition to Parent-Teacher conferences, weekly parent engagement time on Tuesday afternoons, Back to School events, the ENL teacher schedules annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss their language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs. When needed, the bilingual English/Spanish parent coordinator is available, in addition to other bilingual staff members, or the services of the DOE translation unit are used. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. PS 64 has an active PTA and School Leadership Team. Parents of ELLs and former ELLs are involved and are represented in all school-wide activities and functions. Parents of English language learners have the opportunity to attend various educational workshops held throughout the school year, which include local agencies and organizations that can provide assistance to new immigrant families. PS 64 translates all notices to inform parents of various workshops and meetings. PTA meetings and workshops are also orally translated for parents. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. N/A 2 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Marlon L. Hosang, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 3  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: The Robert Simon School School DBN: 01M064 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Marlon Hosang Title Principal Daniela D'Arcangelo Assistant Principal Gladys Concepcion Parent Coordinator Martin Perl ENL/Bilingual Teacher Zenaida Watson Parent Amy Stone/Coach Teacher/Subject Area Alyssa Leone/RTI Teacher/Subject Area N/A Judy Golubchick Coach Coach N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A School Counselor Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member N/A Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 09/27/17 09/27/17 09/27/17 09/27/17 09/27/17 09/27/17 09/27/17 09/27/17 N/A 4  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 01M064 School Name: The Robert Simon School Superintendent: D. Phillips The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Gladys Concepcion Parent Coordinator Yes Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. We use the parent/guardian responses to the Pre-Kindergarten Home Language Identification Survey, and the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS) to ascertain which language(s) the parents prefer to use when the school communicates with them. Parents indicate this at the bottom of the page in the HLIS part 3 Parent Information, as to what language they want to receive written and oral communication. This data is also reflected in ATS reports (RCPL) Preferred Language Report, and the blue emergency cards kept on file in the main office. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. 5  Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral English Spanish Chinese Arabic 212 17 8 4 86.53 6.94 3.27 0.61 212 18 8 4 86.53 7.35 3.27 0.61 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. N/A Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families Pre-K and Kindergarten, and school handbooks. In September, and throughout the school year for newly admitted students Parent-teacher conference announcements In November, March, and May Announcements of NY State Tests, ELA, Math, Science Two weeks prior to the test in April, May, June Tuesday Parent Engagement Reminders September and monthly thereafter Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. The DOE Translation and Interpretation Unit if necessary, at least two weeks in advance or when ever possible by bilingual staff in the school. The DOE Translation and Interpretation Unit if necessary, at least two weeks in advance or when ever possible by bilingual staff in the school. The DOE Translation and Interpretation Unit if necessary, at least two weeks in advance or when ever possible by bilingual staff in the school. The DOE Translation and Interpretation Unit if necessary, at least two weeks in advance or when ever possible by bilingual staff in the school. 6  2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide interpretation service(s)? Parent-teacher conferences November, March, and May Using bilingual school staff. Tuesday Parent Engagement time Monthly reminders Curriculum Night September ENL teacher meetings with parents Monthly Using bilingual school staff. Using bilingual school staff. Using bilingual school staff. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. Through school messenger messages in English and Spanish. Dojo and other translation communication applications such as Google. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Chancellor's Regulation A-663 information is disseminated to the entire staff at meetings held at the beginning of the school year, along with other pertinent Chancellor's Regulations. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) All New York City Department of Education materials which include documents, posters, and other materials which have been translated are posted and disseminated to parents if needed. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? 7  The school takes the responses to the parent survey very seriously, and all effort is made to respond accordingly to parents' feedback. The LAP team addresses these matters, and discusses the parent feedback with the staff at school-wide meetings. 8 
