 01M142 School Name: P.S. 142 AMALIA CASTRO Principal: DAPHNA GUTMAN 2018-19 CEP-CS 1  Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC)  Section 1: School Information Page School Information P.S. 142 – The Amalia Castro School 01M142 School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Phone Number: 310100010142 Pre-K - 5 100 Attorney Street 212 598-3800 School Number (DBN): 212 598-3810 Fax: DaphnaGutman dgutman@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Geographical District: O1 Superintendent’s Office Address: Email Address: DaphnaGutman Shirley Yeung Melissa Hernandez DaphnaGutman Marisa Chavez N/A N/A District Information Carry Chan Superintendent: PS 20 Cchan2@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: (212) 353-2948 Phone Number: Manhattan FSC: (718) 796-8657 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) Yuet Chu Executive Director:   Executive Director’s Office Address: 333 7 th Avenue YChu@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: (212) 356-3845 Phone Number: (212) 356-7546 Fax:   Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) DaphnaGutman Shirley Yeung Melissa Hernandez Marisa Chavez Charlotte Bush Grace Tayo Bianca Navas Carmen Rodriguez *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/Parent Member/Teacher Member/Parent   Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Brandon Davis Yesenia Feliciano Christina Chiu Amanda Duverge Ariel Bender Member/Teacher Member/Parent Member/Teacher Member/Parent Member/Teacher Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/   Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with   the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement   Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? As a barrier-free Community School site, it is our mission to teach every child to reach his or her fullest potential. We provide rigorous academic instruction for all of our students in an emotionally and academically supportive environment. We believe that each child is an individual with unique strengths and needs. As such, we are committed to designing customized instruction for each child to meet these needs. We believe in building a strong, supportive community through collaborative working relationships between parents and staff and between our site and community-based organizations.   2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. P.S. 142 is an elementary school located on Manhattan’s Lower East Side serving students in pre-kindergarten through grade five. The surrounding neighborhood is diverse, a mixture of Hispanic, African-American and Asian families, many of whom are recent immigrants. The predominant language of the neighborhood is Spanish. The school has a student population of approximately 350 in 19 classes. As a barrier-free building, P.S. 142 serves children in general education as well as children receiving special education services. In keeping with the school’s barrier-free designation, the school integrates special and general education students in science, music, art, gym and in integrated co-teaching classrooms at all grade levels. In addition, we have three self-contained special education classrooms for students with more profound learning disabilities. P.S. 142 has adopted the reading and writing units of study published by Teachers College, and we work directly with TCRWP receiving in-house coaching from TCRWP staff developers. In addition, P.S. 142 has a long tradition of infusing our students’ education with arts. We have a full-time certified art teacher who maintains a visual arts studio. We will have a full-time certified music teacher as well as our longstanding partnership with Rosie's Theater Kids enabling us to offer musical theater for our 5th grade students. Through our partnership with Change for Kids, students in grades K-3 work with Story Pirates, 4th grade will engage in a year-long residency with the New York Historical Society, and 5th grade will partner with City Parks. Finally, our partnership with Educational Alliance extends this arts programming beyond the school day into the “After-3-Arts" program provided free of charge to over half of our students. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. Approximately 36% of our students receive special education supports. This is evident in the three 12:1 classes we maintain as well as at least one ICT classroom on each grade level. In addition, we staff four Speech and Language teachers as well as providing occupational therapy and physical therapy services. The vast majority of our related service providers use an integrated service model to maintain instructional continuity and enhance transfer of skills and tools to the general education curriculum. In addition, about 10% percent of P.S. 142’s students are English Language Learners. An ENL program is in place in which students in grades K-5 receive daily instruction. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. According to the 2017-18 Quality Review, P.S. 142 excels at leveraging our resources to support our teachers and students. This is evident in our efforts to use an integrated service model for related services so that students receive their supports within the general education curriculum and do not miss instruction for pull-out services. We also devote resources to supplementary instruction for small groups of students both after school and on Saturdays. This enables teachers to meet the needs of students and provide extra challenge to those who need it. Another area of strength is the professional collaboration of teachers both on the grade level and across the grades. The teachers confirm this on this school survey where 100% of teachers stated they design instructional programs together and 94% of teachers say they make a conscious effort to coordinate their teaching with instruction at other grade levels. Teachers meet regularly to look at and analyze student work and plan instruction. Common preparation periods are scheduled daily so that teachers can maximize their time with colleagues. The percentage of students receiving level 1 of the New York State ELA exam has dropped each year since 2015 from 52% to 24% in 2018. At the same time, students scoring at or above grade level has increased from 9% to 38%. In mathematics, the percentage of students receiving level 1 dropped from 48% in 2015 to 38% in 2018, and students scoring at or above grade level increased from 20% to 31%. In 2017, all grade levels adopted the EngageNY math curriculum. As this was our first year fully adopting this curriculum, teachers spent time in professional development sessions learning the new instructional approaches. We continued working with a math coach from Metamorphosis to help teachers develop deeper content knowledge and 0  strengthen instruction in problem solving. This year, we are joining the Math Collective to provide teachers more access to teacher-led professional development in both content and mathematics instructional practices. Improvement in ELA scores stems largely from establishing coherent and aligned reading and writing curriculum as well as our work with TCRWP to strengthen teaching practice and build instructional capacity. We will continue to invest in professional development with TCRWP for all teachers in kindergarten through 5th grade. As we look ahead to the 2018-19 school year, we are not anticipating any large scale curriculum changes. Having our instructional core established, we now plan to focus on increasing student independence and agency throughout all curriculum areas. 1  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 01M142 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration PK,0K,01,02,03,04,05 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 340 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 39 38 19 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 13 10 19 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 97.0% % Attendance Rate 92.6% % Reduced Lunch 7.9% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 1.8% 82.6% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 0.3% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 3.22 0% 15% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 38.4% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 78% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A YES N/A YES YES Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A NO N/A N/A NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A YES High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 74 73 91.8% 4.7% 35.9% 12.6% 2.4% 2.1% 2 0% 11.8 31.3% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No N/A N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A NO N/A N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. On the 2017 New York State ELA exam, 25% of students did not meet the benchmark. This represents a substantial reduction in students not meeting the ELA testing benchmark compared to 2016, when 41% of students did not meet the benchmark. By grade, the scores breakdown as follows: Grade 3: Level 1 Level 2 Level 3 Level 4 2018 10% 2017 15% 2016 45% 31% 41% 30% 59% 41% 23% 0% 1% 1% Grade 4: Level 1 Level 2 Level 3 Level 4 2018 14% 2017 12% 2016 38% 46% 47% 47% 34% 29% 9% 6% 12% 7% Grade 5: Level 1 Level 2 Level 3 Level 4 3 2018 46% 2017 38% 2016 41% 34% 43% 41% 11% 13% 15% 9% 5% 2% These outcomes are evidence of continued efforts to bring continuity to the ELA curriculum. We use the TCRWP Reading and Writing units of study, and as a "Project School" teachers receive have 10 days of in-house professional development from a TCRWP coach. Teachers also benefit from at least one workshop or institute at Teachers College during the school year. In addition, curriculum maps, as well as unit plans for all Read Aloud units, were created by grade teams and posted on Google Drive providing visibility to all staff members. In addition, all supplementary units of study (as the TC bundle includes only 4 units) were posted on Drive as well. On the 2017 New York State Math exam, students not meeting the benchmark decreased to 38% from 41% in 2016. By grade, the scores breakdown as follows: Grade 3: Level 1 Level 2 Level 3 Level 4 2018 21% 2017 39% 2016 32% 32% 24% 47% 39% 30% 18% 7% 6% 3% Grade 4: Level 1 Level 2 Level 3 Level 4 2018 50% 2017 40% 2016 47% 32% 37% 36% 15% 23% 14% 3% 0% 4% Grade 5: Level 1 Level 2 Level 3 Level 4 2018 38% 2017 36% 2016 40% 29% 39% 38% 29% 20% 19% 3% 5% 2% In 2017-18 teachers implemented the Engage NY math units of study. As this was a new curriculum, grade teams of teachers worked together during Monday PD sessions and grade level common preps to unpack the units. Teachers also worked together to norm their use of the unit assessments. Finally, grade teams used the information gathered 4  from graded student work to collaboratively develop strategies for supporting struggling students and challenging students working above grade level. Grade teams also received 5 days of in-house coaching from a staff developer with Metamorphosis and several teachers attended institutes offered by Metamorphosis for more in-depth math content development. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, the number of students in grades 3-5 including ELLs and students with disabilities performing at Level 1 will decrease 10 percentage points, from 38% to 28% of tested students as evidenced by the NYS Mathematics exam. 5  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Principal and Assistant Principal Weekly, Sept 2018 – October 2018 Daily, Sept. 2018 – June 2019 Principal, Assistant Principal, As available, Sept. 2018 – June 2019 Principal, Assistant Principal Activity #1 - Professional Development : During staff-wide professional development, teachers will use the NYS item analysis to identify school-wide areas of need and work in heterogeneous grade clusters to identify the top 3 standards to focus on for math school-wide. Activity #2 - Math Instruction: All teachers will implement the EngageNY units, using the lessons as a basis for their daily math instruction. Teachers will use pacing calendars from the Math Collective to modify lessons and pacing to make instruction less teacher-focused and more student-focused. Classroom teachers, special education teachers, cluster teachers Classroom teachers, intervention teachers special education teachers Teachers will work in grade teams to unpack each unit before starting to teach it. Teachers will identify teaching points and resources to support students. Activity #3 - Targeted Professional Development: Teachers will attend professional development provided by Metamorphosis and Math Collective specifically targeting the identified areas of need (see Activity #1). Attending teachers will turnkey learning to colleagues upon returning. Classroom teachers, intervention teachers special education teachers 3b – Parent and Family Engagement 6  How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Teachers will use their parent engagement time to hold workshops for parents to introduce new models or algorithms as needed. Teachers will also communicate with parents using ClassDojo regarding homework support. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Personnel: - Principal and assistant principal will be responsible for supporting teachers in using the Math Collective materials to modify EngageNY pacing and lessons. - Principal and assistant principal will be responsible for identifying supplementary PD opportunities (Metamorphosis and Math Collective workshops and institutes) and facilitating teacher attendance. Schedule Adjustments: - Daily common grade level preparation periods to facilitate grade-wide planning and collaboration. - Coverage/Per session for external PD. Instructional Resources: - EngageNY is available free, online. - Funds for Metamorphosis workshops and per session for Math Collective workshops. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A X C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Unit assessment data will be logged and reviewed to determine student mastery of content. EngageNY unit assessments should show 70% of students mastering a minimum of 70% of standards addressed in each unit. Special attention will be paid to student subgroups -- including ELLs and SWDs. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) EngageNY unit assessments. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 7  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? The 2017-18 School Survey indicated high levels of family satisfaction and engagement. 96% of parents indicated the teacher works closely with them to meet their child's needs and 97% say they feel respected by their child's teachers. We host Family Fridays once each month providing families an opportunity to visit the classroom and participate in learning with their child. We have also added an additional parent-teacher conference night in January. This enables parents to have scheduled time with teachers to review their child's progress every two to three months (November, January, March) throughout the school year, in addition to more informal opportunities as needed. We want to leverage these strong relationships with parents to improve daily student attendance. For the last several years, the percentage of chronically absent students has remained around 30%. During the 2017-18 school year, our monthly attendance reached a high of 94.34% in September. For 4 months of the school year, the monthly attendance fell below 92%. When students are not in school, we cannot provide instruction. Therefore, we aim to improve our student attendance through school-wide initiatives as well as targeted support for families. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, monthly student attendance will exceed 92% for at least 7 months of the school year. 8  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Activity 1: Weekly attendance meetings will be facilitated by the guidance counselor and attended by the assistant principal, CFK manager, Community School Director, school aides, family worker, and parent coordinator. These meetings will identify any students who have been absent frequently since the last meeting and/or for more than 2 consecutive days. Attendance Team members will identify barriers to student attendance and design and execute specific action plans to support families to increase attendance. (For example, caregivers of students with chronic asthma will be offered training in managing asthma to improve attendance.) Activity 2: Each month, classes with attendance of 95% or higher will receive recognition on their classroom doors. Every 3 months, the classes with an average attendance rate of 95% or higher will participate in a special event (e.g. extra recess, pizza, bonus class trip). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Assistant Principal, Guidance Counselor All students Weekly, September 2018-June 2019 All students Monthly, September 2018-June 2019 Guidance Counselor, Parent Coordinator Activity 3: Provide families with monthly attendance reports so that they can monitor their child’s attendance, and assign interventions for families with attendance below 90%. As these interventions are personalized, specific student needs relating to housing, language, and disability will be addressed. Students with 3 or more absences per month. Monthly, September 2018- June 2019 Guidance Counselor, Community School Director Activity 4: Strategic planning of school events to support attendance on days that have historically been low-attendance days. For example, on Fridays before a long weekend, school photos are scheduled to encourage attendance. All students As needed, September 2018-June 2019 Community School Director, Parent Coordinator 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Henry Street Settlement will provide workshops to families on Family Fridays. Members of the attendance team will reach out to caregivers when students are absent and collate data on reasons for absence to inform the work of the team. 9  Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Guidance counselor will coordinate and implement initiatives. Guidance counselor will reach out to CBOs to assist in supporting families as needed. School aides, family worker, and parent coordinator will call families as needed. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A Title III, Part A PTA Funded X In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, student attendance will exceed 92% for 4 of the 6 months. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Attendance records, RYIS screen Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 0  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Teachers at P.S. 142 have a long tradition of collaborative planning. According to the 2017 School Survey, 100% of teachers of teachers said that they talk with one another about instruction. In order to bring consistency and rigor to our ELA instruction, teachers implemented the Teachers College Reading Units of Study in 2015, followed by the Writing Units of Study in 2016. This paved the way for us to become an official TCRWP partner school in 2017. As part of this professional development relationship, teachers will receive 10 professional development sessions with a TCRWP coach which will include a labsite experience. Teachers will also have the opportunity to attend workshops and mini-institutes at Teachers College. These opportunities will be selected based on demonstrated need and in response to teachers' professional goals set in September. Speech, ENL, and special education teachers are included in this professional development. ENL and special education teachers attend PD at Teachers College that specifically and explicitly addresses meeting the needs of those subgroups of students. In 2018-19, we continued the practice of providing common preparation periods every day for all kindergarten through 5th grade teachers, including special education teachers. This offered teachers opportunities to collaborate daily during the school day. This structure was used regularly by teachers who could often be observed meeting formally and informally during these periods, and we plan to continue to offer daily common preps in the 2018-19 school year. Speech, ENL, and special education teachers attend these meetings. Only 91% said they had the opportunities to work productively with colleagues at their school on professional development. Therefore, during the 2018-19 school year, we will engage in cycles of professional learning facilitated and planned by teachers for each other. Together, administration and staff will develop protocols for teachers to work in teams around topics relating to developing student independence and agency in our classrooms. Staff will choose the team and topic, using a cycles of inquiry model. At the end of each 6-8 week cycle, we will share our learning in a share-fair experience for all staff. This supports the District 1 vision of increased learner agency and independence as teachers take charge of their own learning. As teachers develop and refine their teaching practices through PLCs focused on our school-wide goal of developing student agency, we expect to see an increase in student independence as measured by the Learning Environment Survey. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. 1  By June 2018, through collaboration in PLCs, we will enhance and refine teacher practices in component 3c, Engaging Students in Learning, as evidenced by a shift in student ownership of learning as measured by the Learning Environment Survey questions around Peer Support for Academic Work increasing from 70% to 75%. 2  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Activity #1 - Needs Assessment: Teachers Sept. 2018 Principal Teachers will be surveyed to determine (1) perceived areas of need and (2) perceived areas of strength. This data combined with Advance and student assessment data will be used to determine inquiry group offerings as well as to identify teacher facilitators for these groups. Activity #2- Professional Development: Teachers will be divided into inquiry groups according to surveyed preferences and, in those groups, engage in a cycle of inquiry over 6-8 weeks. Activity #3 - Professional Development: Teachers will share process and findings with colleagues at the culmination of each cycle of inquiry in a share fair. N/A 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Teachers Sept. 2018 – May 2019 Principal, Assistant Principal N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Teachers will continue to share strategies and techniques with families at Family Friday events as well as individual conferences. Parent Engagement time follows our professional development block on Monday afternoons providing a smooth transition from learning to turnkeying to families. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Scheduling - Monday PD time 3  Instructional Resources: - Professional resources purchased as needed by school Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA X Title II, Part A SIG PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, teachers will have participated in at least 1 cycle of inquiry and 1 share fair. Teacher responses to feedback survey administered following this cycle will show over 90% of teachers can articulate one way their instruction improved as a result of the cycle. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Learning Environment Survey questions regarding coherence of professional development experiences and collaboration among teachers. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 4  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. During the 2016-17 school year, an Equity Team was formed to study staff attitudes about race and the impact those attitude may have on instruction and school culture. A survey administered to staff indicated that a variety of perspectives were held regarding the role race plays in our community and school. Staff was not unanimous in their thinking about whether race should be acknowledged or considered when planning instruction. The Equity Team led an introductory professional development session around race and equity on June 12, 2017. Reflection sheets from participants (both paraprofessionals and teachers) indicated a strong desire to continue studying how race impacts teaching and learning. Responses indicated an interest in learning more about providing culturally responsive instruction. In the 2017-18 school year, the Equity Team recruited new members and planned and facilitated at least 10 professional development activities for the staff to surface and address attitudes about race and equity. While some staff embraced the work, others found it challenging to acknowledge bias and its implications for our teaching and lives. Though 97% of teachers said on the Learning Environment Survey that they adapt instruction to ensure it represents all cultures and background positively, teacher responses regarding classroom behavior lagged behind the District and City, indicating instruction and classroom environments may not be meeting students' needs. Therefore, we are committed to continuing and deepening our efforts to support teachers in developing their cultural competence. Over the summer, members of the Equity Team read Ijeoma Oluo's So You Want to Take About Race and Zaretta Hammond's Culturally Responsive Teaching and the Brain in preparation for planning new professional development experiences for the staff for the 2018-19 school year. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, school survey results will demonstrate an increase in the Classroom Behavior section of Supportive Environment score of at least 5 percentage points (form 63% to 68%). 5  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs,  professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Activity #1: Equity Team -- The Equity team will meet bi-monthly. The team will work to assess the school community's attitude(s) about race and equity. The team will conduct research and design activities and experiences to surface and explore attitudes and perspectives around race and equity at least 8 times across the school year. Activity #2: Professional Development -- The staff will engage in 8 professional development experiences designed by the Equity Team across the school year. These experiences will be designed to help staff members surface and confront their attitudes about race and equity, in order to move toward a school culture in which equity is at the heart of our practice. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Equity Team Principal Bimonthly, September 2018- June 2109 Classroom teachers, paraprofessionals, Monthly, September 2018- June 2019 Equity Team How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. The work of the Equity Team will be shared with the School Leadership Team. Families will be invited to at least 1 activity planned by the Equity Team. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Resources: -- Per session payment for Equity Team members -- Resource material (e.g. Culturally Responsive Teaching and the Brain, So You Want to Talk about Race?) 6  Personnel: -- Teachers and principal Schedule Adjustments: -- N/A Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, the Equity Team will have conducted 5 PD experiences with the school community. A staff survey including questions resembling those in the classroom behavior section of the Learning Environment Survey will be administered to assess progress toward June goal. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. In-house survey Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 7  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. The 2017-18 School Survey results indicated high levels of family satisfaction and engagement. 95% of families responded positively to questions about inclusive leadership. 95% of families said the school staff works hard to build trusting relationships with families like them and 96% indicated they trust the school administration. During the 2017-18 school year, we continued to hold month Family Fridays. These mornings are opportunities for caregivers to join their students in class during the first instructional period of the day. Caregivers are then invited for "cafecito" and a workshop. Workshops ranged in topics from how to help with homework to finding a summer program for your child. Some workshops were presented by representatives from our partner agencies (including Educational Alliance, Henry Street Settlement and Grand Street Settlement) while others were facilitated by teachers and our parent coordinator. Workshop topics were informed by a survey given to families in September 2017. We continued our practice of holding an additional parent-teacher conference date in January specifically for teachers to meet with any caregivers of students at risk of not meeting promotional criteria. At these meetings, teacher discussed areas in which students were at risk, shared specific strategies that teachers planned to implement, and shared strategies that caregivers could use at home. This year we also opened our Family Resource Center in partnership with Henry Street Settlement. This room is designed to be a space for families to access resources they need in order to support their children's academic growth. Henry Street staff will hold drop-in hours regularly for parents to receive one-on-one assistance in accessing resources (e.g. job placement services, housing assistance, etc.). Henry Street staff will also hold monthly workshops for parents the topics of which will be determined in consultation with parents. Our partners at Educational Alliance will also offer a week-long parenting skills training at least twice during the school year. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. During the 2018-19 school year, 100% of 2nd through 5th grade teachers will implement student-led conferences rather than parent-teacher conferences in November and March. 8  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Activity #1: Professional Development Teachers in grades 2-5. October 15, 2018 Parent coordinator, Principal Two teachers who have already implemented the practice of student-led conferences will facilitate training for all other teachers. Documents to help prepare students for these conversations will be shared via Google Drive. Activity #2: Implementation of Student-Led Conferences Students in grades 2-5 will conduct their progress report conferences in November and March. All students and families in 2nd-5th grade November 2018 and March 2019 Principal N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. N/A Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 9  Professional development time will be used for training. No additional resources are necessary. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. In November 2018, reflection with staff will determine whether additional training is needed for March conferences. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. N/A Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 0  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Students are referred for AIS services by classroom teachers and/or parents. Teachers assess students and, based on assessments of students who are struggling, teachers complete the AIS referral form. AIS Team meets weekly and classroom teachers participate in the meeting. Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) One-on-one, Small Groups, or whole class as appropriate  School day  Extended Day which is provided after school 2 days per week for grades 3-5. Literacy Initiative which is implemented daily by Speech teachers.   Wilson initiative which is implemented 4 daysper week after school. During the school day, AIS intervention is provided by IEP teacher. Guided reading using the Fountas and Pinnell Leveled Literacy Intervention Kits is one method of intervention.Other programs such as Spire, PAF, Great Leaps, Just Words, and Wilson Reading Systemare used as well as double doses of guided reading and Fundations. The entire 1st grade and Kindergarten receives Fundations during the school day. In grades 2-4, Fundations is used where needed by intervention providers. Students in grades 3-5 will have additional intervention provided using programs listed above as well as pre-teaching, supplemental guided 1  School Day & After School Whole group, Small Groups, One-on-One, as appropriate Mathematics Students are referred for AIS services by classroom teachers and/or parents. Teachers assess students and, based on assessments of students who are struggling, teachers complete the AIS referral form. AIS Team meets weekly and classroom teachers participate in meeting. reading, shared writing, and other strategies as determined by the teacher. Students are instructed usingEngageNY in K-5. Small group instruction and intervention is provided by the IEP teacher as needed. Xtramath.org and other web-based programs are used to build fluency in grades 2-5. Extended day is provided for students in grades 3-5. Number talks are used in conjunction with pre-teaching and other strategies as deemed appropriate by the teacher Science Students are referred for AIS services by classroom teachers and/or parents. FOSS Whole group, Small Groups, One-on-One, as appropriate School day Teachers assess students and, based on assessments of students who are struggling, teachers complete the AIS referral form. AIS Team meets weekly and classroom teachers participate in mtg. Students are referred for AIS services by Social Studies Grades Pre-K-3 inquiry study/word work Whole group, Small Groups, One-on-One, as appropriate School Day 2 Small group or one-on-one as appropriate School Day classroom teachers and/or parents. Grades 3-5 use in-house materials. Teachers assess students and, based on assessments of students who are struggling, teachers complete the AIS referral form. At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) AIS Team meets weekly and classroom teachers participate in mtg. Students are referred for AIS services by classroom teachers and/or parents. Teachers assess students and, based on assessments of students who are struggling, teachers complete the AIS referral form. AIS Team meets weekly and classroom teachers participate in meeting. Guidance Counselor: Family Intervention, bereavement counseling, behavioral modifications, short term therapeutic counseling related to issues interfering with academic performance and home life School Social Worker: Bilingual Crisis intervention, Family crisis intervention, Social Services referrals for public assistance and immigration issues. Coordination of special education services including OT, PT, etc. School Psychologist: Family counseling, individual and group counseling of students displaying academic difficulties. Address emotional and social factors. 3  Henry Street Settlement Social Worker: crisis intervention, therapeutic counseling related to issues interfering with academic performance and home life, management of student medications where necessary. 4  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 71 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. Students in temporary housing have first priority in our academic after school program and our Saturday School program. They are also eligible for the After-3-Arts program provided by Educational Alliance. In addition, all students in temporary housing receive school uniforms as needed as well as basic supplies (school and personal hygiene). Our school secretary coordinates busing for students, as needed, and our partner organizations (Henry Street Settlement, Educational Alliance and Go Project) provide supplemental counseling support for students as needed. In addition, Educational Alliance works to connect families in need of housing support with resources through Nazareth Housing and GOLES. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 5  N/A 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. N/A 6  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. 100% of teachers at P.S. 142 are state-certified. · P.S. 142 interviews and hires teachers based on the needs of the school. · P.S. 142 recruits from a pool of student teachers who have interned at the P.S. 142 school site and are recommended by classroom teachers and observed by administration. P.S. 142 encourages teachers and paraprofessionals to become certified and to stay lifetime learners by using flexible scheduling to make allowances for attending classes and special events related to educational opportunities. Our Monday professional development offerings are designed and carried out by the PD committee which consists of the principal and teacher representatives from each grade level as well as out-of-classroom teachers. We will also provide PD through Metamorphosis, Teachers College, and the Morningside Center for Social Responsibility (in partnership with the FSC). In addition, the assistant principal facilitates new teacher group to support teachers who are new to teaching as well as those who are new to our school. The topics covered are chosen by the participating teachers and may include book studies, 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). At P.S. 142, we recognize that high quality professional development is essential for meeting the needs of our students as well as retaining excellent staff members. We eagerly partner with experts who can bring value to our teaching corps including TCRWP, Metamorphosis, and the Morningside Center for Social Responsibility. We also recognize that like good teaching, good professional development is differentiated according to needs. Therefore, we leverage expertise in the building to make sure that staff members receive the training they need most. 7  Staff who demonstrate excellence in one area (e.g. behavior management strategies, assessing readers, planning for differentiation, writing quality IEPs, etc.) will be called upon to present workshops on Monday afternoons and during other professional development time. All of our work is relevant to and embedded in our curriculum development and instructional focus. Topics are determined by the professional development team and reflect the needs of the staff. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). The Head Start Program housed in our building (Educational Alliance) feeds into our Universal Pre-K. During the year, Family Assistants from both programs join together in planning and administering particular workshops for parents. In the fall, Early Childhood Social Worker distributes a survey to parents, asking about their interests in various workshop topics. Throughout the year, Early Childhood social worker facilitates parent workshops throughout the school year, in conjunction with the Parent Coordinator and Family Assistant. Topics include: Adjustment to Pre-K, Typical Development of 4 & 5 year-olds, Applying for Kindergarten, and (in early spring) Preparing for the Transition to Kindergarten. In early winter, teachers, Family Assistant, and Early Childhood Social Worker inform parents in many ways about the application process for Kindergarten in parents' native language , including email info "blasts" with due dates, and timelines, workshops, info sessions, and personal assistance, when needed. By late spring, Family Assistant takes Pre-K parents on tours of Kindergarten classrooms to familiarize them with the classroom, curriculum, expectations, etc. Throughout the year, student progress is assessed, and those students with IEPs are monitored for progress within their IEP goals as well with class goals. Families of students with IEPs are made aware of "Turning Five" meetings to plan for students' transition to any special education services needed in Kindergarten. Families are supported by teachers, Family Assistant, and Early Childhood Social Worker during this process. 8  Beginning in May, Head Start students visit Pre-K and Pre-K children make regular visits to kindergarten classrooms. In June, the principal hosts an orientation for families of incoming PreK and K students. At this orientation, school policies as well as beginning of the year procedures are reviewed. Families are also provided information about after-school options provided through our partnership with Educational Alliance. 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. -Based on needs that come up at teacher-team meetings while looking at student work, teacher teams make recommendations to the MOSL team (made up of administration, the UFT Chapter Chair and several teachers). The administration then presents possible interim assessment tools to the School Leadership Team. - Professional Development Committee (5 teachers and one administration representative) meet monthly to plan professional development for Monday afternoons in order to best meet the needs of teachers and paraprofessionals. -PPT and AIS teams are now consolidated into one team. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Column B Section Reference(s) 5A, 5B, 5C, 5A, 5C 5A N/A 5A, 5B, 5C, Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 238,811.00 27,804.00 12,366 0 2,384,741 X X X X X 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and 9  advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. 0   IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.  Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 1  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. PS 142, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. P.S. 142 will support parents and families of Title I students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; 2  ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; ● connecting families to CBOs that provide counseling, housing, legal, and/or employment support as needed. Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., NCLB/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; 3  ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Every Student Succeeds Act. ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; School-Parent Compact (SPC) School-Parent Compact (SPC) P.S. 142 ,in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum 4  Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act. Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; 5  ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; Provide general support to parents by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Every Student Succeeds Act.Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; 6  ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; III. Student Responsibilities Student Responsibilities: ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 7  Addendum: Community School Partnerships Directions: The Community School (CS) strategy is directly aligned to the Framework for Great Schools. Community Schools bring schools and community partners together and integrate academics, health, youth development, and family engagement to provide students with the tools and opportunities they need to succeed. The Core Services in Community Schools are Expanded Learning Time (ELT), Attendance Supports, Family Engagement, and Health & Wellness. Part 1 – Community School Partnerships Goal(s) How is the CS strategy integrated into academic instruction at your school, and what impact has it had on student academic outcomes? The CS strategy is integrated into academic instruction in several ways. (1) Educational Alliance staff members push into classrooms for one 50 minute period each day to support small group instruction. This push-in experience also facilitates greater consistency and coherence across day and after school expectations. (2) A representative of Educational Alliance now participates in our weekly Attendance Committee meetings. This facilitates communication about students needing attendance support. It has also enabled the involvement of Educational Alliance staff in participating in matching mentors with students in need of attendance support. (3) Extended Learning Time is also supported through the CS strategy as after-school academic support is offered 2 days per week for students below grade level in grades 1-5. In addition, students in grades 3-5 will be invited for 2 1/4 hours of additional academic support plus 45 minutes of recreation on Saturdays from January through April. (4) Additionally, family engagement is supported through workshops offered in partnership with Educational Alliance staff for our families. Workshop topics range from learning about how to help with homework to storytelling with children. Indicate the summative goal(s) of the Community School for the 2018-19 school year. Be sure to construct the goal to be SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Realistic, and Time-bound. Program Objective 1.1-1: 100% of students will participate in academic enrichment in core academic areas including reading, mathematics and science to support Common Core Standards at least 3 days a week for 30 weeks. Program Objective 1.2-1: Over 90% of our students will engage in project-based learning in and through the Arts as well as a wide variety of enrichment and youth development services at least 3 days a week for 30 weeks. Program Objective 2.2 – 1: At least 65% of regular attendees will improve their school attendance. Program Objective 2.1–1: At least 45% of regular attendees will increase their ELA, Math and Science skills through project based learning in a supportive learning environment. Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Community School Annual Goal(s): How will achieving your Community School Goal(s)--in Expanded Learning Time (ELT), Attendance Supports, Family Engagement, and Health & Wellness--support your academic goals for students? Achieving our CS goals will support academic goals in several ways. First, increasing attendance rates will ensure that students are in school and can participate in valuable instruction. Second, as family engagement is strengthened, families will be more apt to confer and partner with teachers to support students in achieving academic growth. In addition, expanded learning time will provide opportunities for teachers to provide remediation additional instruction as needed. This will accelerate student academic growth. Finally, supplementary arts and STEM programming will support students academically as they are given opportunities to use academic skills in new and engaging contexts. Moreover, arts and STEM programming will provide students with social and emotional learning support as they find success in non-traditional academic settings. Part 2 – Community School Partnerships Core Services Action Plan 8  Part 2a. Identify the Community-based Organization (CBO) partnerships that you will develop in ELT, Attendance Supports, Family Engagement, and Health & Wellness, their target student population(s), and scope of the services provided. As well as supporting schools’ supportive environment and attendance work, CBOs should be helping to support your school’s instructional focus. CBO Partnership Educational Alliance Target Population Students receiving free or reduced-price lunch, living in temporary housing, and/or ELLs. Educational Alliance All students Educational Alliance All students Scope of Service SY18-19 SMART Goal Program Objective 2.1–1: At least 45% of regular attendees will increase their ELA, Math and Science skills through project based learning in a supportive learning environment. Program Objective 2.2 – 1: At least 65% of regular attendees will improve their school attendance. Program Objective 1.2-1: Over 90% of our students will engage in project-based learning in and through the Arts as well as a wide variety of enrichment and youth development services at least 3 days a week for 30 weeks. Extended Learning Time -- Educational Alliance will provide and arts-based after school program for approximately 180 students. Embedded in the program will be academic supports including homework help and small group work. Community Schools director will participate in attendance meetings and support one-to-one mentoring of students with poor attendance, in addition to supporting attendance initiatives as appropriate. A variety of lunch club offerings will engage students in arts-based projects and activities. We will also partner with organizations like Salvadori and Robofun to provide STEM offerings. In addition, Educational Alliance employees 10 teaching artists who provide instruction in dance, film, and movement among other disciplines. 9  Educational Alliance All students Educational Alliance mentors push into classrooms to provide additional social-emotional support and/or academic support as needed. Program Objective 1.1-1: 100% of students will participate in academic enrichment in core academic areas including reading, mathematics and science to support Common Core Standards at least 3 days a week for 30 weeks. Part 3 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 3a. Indicate resources your Community Partnership will leverage to achieve your summative SMART goal(s) and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. We will use 21st Century Grant funding to support after-school salaries for Educational Alliance staff as well as P.S. 142 teachers. In addition, grant funding through Change for Kids will fund the Salvadori STEM programming. Materials will be funded through 21st Century grant funds as well. Regarding schedule adjustments, Educational Alliance has staggered staff schedules to provide additional classroom support at 1:40 PM, while other staff members come in later to support after classroom teachers' days are finished. Part 3b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) Title I SWP Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside X 21st Century C4E SIG Grant School Achievement X Other Funding Part 3c. Describe how the school will partner with the Lead CBO to do the following: 1. Community Schools are expected to partner with a community-based partner organization (CBO) and together with members of the School Leadership Team, hire a Community School Director. The Director will lead implementation of the asset and needs assessment process, and other critically important coordinating activities. Indicate how you will leverage this aspect of the work. Community Schools are expected to personalize the needs of all students, through strategic programming and services, as determined by the asset and needs assessment, and must also offer Expanded Learning Time (ELT) and mental health programming. In completing this section, ensure that you think about how: (1) the right services are provided to the right students and families at the right time; and (2) how you will seamlessly coordinate services with instructional programming happening throughout and outside of the school day. Indicate how you will implement this work, and describe other programming you anticipate to be in place to strengthen this initiative. Community Schools are expected to emerge as Partnership Schools, which are places where parents and families feel welcome, actively participate in the conversation and decision-making around the renewal of their schools, and have many opportunities to advocate for their children. Monthly meetings and Community 2. 3. 0  4. School Forums engaging families and community stakeholders will be a critical part of this family engagement strategy. Describe how you will implement this aspect of the work. Community School Principals are expected to meet on a weekly basis with their Community School Director, select Assistant Principals, key staff, and other CBOs, to analyze trends in data and case manage individual students. Data tools – including the New Visions Data Sorter - and training will be available for schools to use. Indicate how you will implement this aspect of the work. Our programmatic vision stems from the Positive Youth Development (PYD) framework which emphasizes the importance of out-of-school time as a developmental resource, “a third leg” in the triangle of human development along with the family and the school. Our ultimate goal is to serve the diverse needs of students, especially ELLs, who will benefit from learning opportunities drawing on a variety of skills, with diverse opportunities to excel and receive deserved praise. Based on prior experiences working with special needs and ELL students, we will utilize best practices such as scaffolding, differentiated instruction, and reinforcing content through art, music, and movement to support the success of all students. We will offer a wide range of hands-on academic enrichment, youth development, and family literacy services aiming to complement school day. These offerings and provide youth with additional resources and supports at least five days a week in the critical out-of-school time hours from 3pm to 6 pm. Key elements of our program design include: 1) Alignment with the school day, Common Core Standards, and Priorities for College and Career Readiness: Project S.T.A.R.T will engagingly reinforce the learning that takes place in the classroom “in order to help students close their learning gaps and succeed in the future.” 2) Hands-on activities: Students who benefited from immersion in hands-on experiences performed 20% higher than groups using traditional approaches and had an increase in language acquisition because they speak with purpose and are driven by the creative message they wish to convey, gaining comfort using new and more varied vocabulary; 3) Collaboration among each school and our grass-roots partner, Educational Alliance, a community cradle for our LES families since 1889 - who will provide a wide range of youth development services to enhance program quality. Research has found that partnerships that capitalize on each organization’s assets, resources, and perspectives lead to achievement of goals that could not otherwise be reached.; 4) Staff that is a mix of certified teachers and youth development workers who all participate in regular professional development. Research has found that PD enhances the quality of afterschool programs. c. Alignment with school day: In planning for Project S.T.A.R.T., we developed a planning committee that included the project director, principals, assistant principals, guidance counselors, parent coordinators, CBO staff, and evaluator. This committee will become the program advisory committee once the award is received and will select a 21st Century Community School Coordinator (CSC) to organize and assist the program implementation team in each school. The CSC will be a staff member with full working knowledge of all facets of the school day and will also act as an Educational Liaison for our program to ensure that afterschool is fully aligned with the school day curriculum, school and district goals, NYC, NYS and Common Core Learning standards, as well as college and career readiness priorities. Research has shown that such a Liaison can significantly improve student outcomes. Each CBO will be required to have curriculum and lesson plans directly linked with these standards. Every activity whether it is arts, recreation or academic enrichment will have an objective, discussion questions and follow-up, just as is done during the school day. All after-school academic enrichment activities will be provided by certified teachers who will creatively reinforce the day school standards. The project advisory committee will meet regularly to develop curriculum maps, as well as discuss safety, scheduling, student needs, activity lesson plans, and academic outcomes. Student progress reports will be exchanged between CBO staff and school teachers to confirm that after-school participants are improving academically and behaviorally. d.NYS SEDL Guidelines are reflected: Inspired by innovative NYS SEDL standards to educate “the whole child” by “developing comprehensive community-based systems of supports and services,” Project S.T.A.R.T. aims to move beyond the traditional after-school implementation, which is often delivered in a “fragmented,” and “piecemeal manner.” Our hope is that the 21st CCLC program will fuel the transformation of our traditional schools into robust community schools that expand the school day for all students in full alignment with the 7 core principles of SEDL: 1) Outreach to and engagement of families and community: Recognizing that every family is different, we developed a variety of strategies to engage parents, including workshops, projects, activities, Advisory Council, and recognition ceremonies. 2) Supportive classroom environment and relationships: We will employ caring, committed and experienced staff that has the ability to relate to young people. 3) Social-emotional learning and standards-based instruction: We will integrate these skills into program offerings to provide real-life examples, conflict resolution strategies, and community service. 4) After school, out-of-school, extracurricular, service 1  learning programs and mentoring: Most of our activities will take place afterschool, evenings, weekends and include service learning projects. 5) Alignment of district and school practices: Program staff will also be drawn from the school staff, creating a seamless day. All program staff will receive school and district policies training, and program academic activities will link to and expand school day lessons. 6) Collaboration with community-based child and family services: All our CBO partners provide services throughout our target communities, including youth development, adult education, and social service referrals. 7) Ongoing professional development: Educational Alliance will provide PD, addressing SEDL topics. e. Students and parents involved: The results of each school’s NYCDOE’s School Survey provided an initial parent and student input that directed the planning of this proposal. Our planning team also requested student and parent input through outreach to the PTA, school principals and parent coordinators. This input provided a clear understanding of needs and informed the program type, content, and scheduling, as well as the selection of partners that are well-respected by and familiar with the community. Once the program has been implemented, our CSCs will be primarily responsible for soliciting parent and student input into program design through phone calls, meetings, surveys, and participation in quarterly Advisory and QSA meetings to inform program enhancements. f. Family Engagement: Educational Alliance will lead the family engagement and education with a well-rounded menu of activities, aligned with the National Standards for Parent/Family Involvement and the Harvard Family Research Project that foster the concept of “Parents as Partners and Advocates” in the education of their children. Families from all three sites will be offered workshops, classes, projects, and activities centered on family involvement and empowerment. Topics will cover Empowered Parenting, Healthy Coping Skills, Understanding Actions: Preventing Bullying, Gang Awareness, Drug Awareness, Walking in Your Child’s Shoes, and Being a Positive Role Model. Parents will also be encouraged to visit Project S.T.A.R.T after school activities and participate in end-of-semester celebrations of student achievement. Through the Advisory Committee, orientation programs, community service activities, and QSA meetings, parents will be encouraged to become actively involved not only in our program, but also in their children’s education. Most students at our target schools struggle academically, perform poorly on NYS standardized tests, and are exposed to a multitude of risk factors in the surrounding community. Project S.T.A.R.T will provide a mix of academic enrichment and youth development activities before school, after-school, and on Saturdays to sustain the learning and development of participants and promote academic success. Young people at our schools face a variety of social and emotional issues that are associated with high-risk behaviors. Project S.T.A.R.T. will offer an expanded day program during the critical hours of 3-6 pm, when parents are not yet home and when most at-risk behaviors occur. Research has found that after-school opportunities that provide a mix of core content, art, STEM, and wellness activities “encourage students to remain in school and take an active role in their learning, which results in increased academic scores and achievement levels for participating students.” Therefore, we will dedicate at least 2 hours each day to enrichment activities, such as arts and health & fitness. Tailored to address not only the needs, but also the interest of students, these activities will also promote consistent day school attendance, SEDL, and academic achievement. We will also offer students 15 minutes at the beginning of our program to relax after the school day, and enjoy a nutritious snack. The need for enrichment, differentiated instruction, and arts-integration is also supported through collaborative PD. We provide activities in the evening and on weekends to engage parents, who are unavailable during program hours. We will also provide several opportunities for parent literacy and engagement, which will be scheduled based on parent availability. Part 4 – Community School Partnerships Oversight Part 4a. Key Staff and Partners 1. Name and describe the scope of involvement of all community partners working in the school (include partners supporting ELT, counseling, enrichment, etc.) 2. Name the members of your Community School Team and how meetings will be organized and structured to engage all stakeholders and be focused on results. 3. Explain data strategies including the use of the data sorter, and steps that the school will take to ensure that the appropriate interventions are provided to the right students 2  1. Educational Alliance is our community partner. 2. Members of the Community School Team include Joe Garreffa (Community Schools Director), Carly McCollow (Program Director), and Daphna Gutman (Principal). Meetings are held weekly following an agenda that is crafted to respond to current issues as well as review long-term goals. 3. In addition to the data sorter, data collected by classroom teachers, including reading levels and math assessment data, will be used to identify which students attend academic after school and Saturday programming. Attendance data collected through ATS will be used to assess impact of attendance strategies as well as how to direct attendance interventions. Part 4b. Indicate resources needed including human resources, instructional resources, and schedule adjustments to implement the Community School program. Funding for after school and CBO staff is needed. Schedules of CBO staff were adjusted to enable classroom push in. No school schedule changes were needed. Part 4c. Timeline for implementation and completion, including start and end dates. Implementation of activities started September 7, 2018 and will end June 20, 2019. Part 4d. Mental Health Work Plan Separate from this S/CEP, schools will complete a Mental Health Work Plan that will become an addendum to this document. 3  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 4  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: The school will conduct after-school programming for our ENL students focused on reading and writing in the content areas. Rationale: We want to concentrate on grades 2-5 because 2nd through 5th grade is where we have the highest concentration of ELLs at the Expanding and Transitioning levels. In addition, grades 3-5 also has the majority of ELLs overall. In second grade, two students scored at the Expanding level. In third grade, 5 out of 5 current ELLs scored at the Expanding level in Spring 2018. In the current 4th grade class, three students scored Transitioning, two scored Expanding, one Emerging and one Entering. In fifth grade, two students scored Transitioning and two scored Expanding. Furthermore, we also believe that tackling complex texts and writing about high-interest, culturally-relevant academic content helps to build essential comprehension and language skills for all ELLs, as this kind of intellectual work builds both content and academic vocabulary. Because the after school work focuses on the same content areas and themes tackled during the academic school day, students have multiple opportunities to practice and internalize the new content and academic vocabulary. This promotes transfer and mastery of the new language and skills. Grades and levels: Grade 2: Expanding level Grade 3: Expanding level Grade 4: Entering - Expanding levels Grade 5: Entering - Expanding levels Schedule: Wednesdays and Thursdays Duration: 40 Sessions ( November 7th through the final week of April) from 2:40-4:15 pm. Each session has two periods running 45 minutes in length with a five minute transition time between. The ENL-certified teachers will be co teaching with each collaborating teacher at least one period per day. # and types of certified teachers: Each section will be taught by one of our two ENL-certified teachers in collaboration with a common branch certified classroom teacher. (The grade level teacher may be either special ed or general ed certified.) Materials: Teachers will use leveled texts, the Fountas and Pinnell Leveled Literacy Intervention Kit, and other nonfiction reading material as needed. 5  Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: Our ENL teacher, Christie Lillard, will participate in a study group over 3 sessions with other teachers participating in the ENL after school program. This sessions will take place across the academic year as part of an ongoing professional development series. General education, special education and ENL teachers will receive targeted training in culturally responsive teaching practices that are engaging and effective for diverse student populations. The ENL teacher will collaborate with other staff members on how to implement these newly-learned best practices. Topics will include culturally responsive teaching, supporting students' social and emotional wellbeing, as well as having authentic and enriching academic discussions with students at different proficiency levels. There is no Title III funding used to implement this PD. Books and materials will be purchased with other funding streams. Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: The school will host a series of workshops for parents and students to learn about different literacy strategies and how to support their students' language skills at home. The first workshop will be led by the ENL teacher and will focus on literacy practices and vocabulary-building strategies that parents can use at home with their children. This workshop will be intended specifically for parents of ELLs in order to support students' oral language development and positive reading habits. This workshop will be held on January 7, 2019. The second workshop will be led by our ENL teacher and will explain the structure of the NYSESLAT and share strategies for approaching the different tasks. This will be held on March 11, 2019 and is intended for all parents of ELLs. Parents of ELLs often ask for ways in which they can work with their child at home, when they can not speak the language of the school. This workshop will introduce them to ways in which they can engage with their child in English as well as their home language, even if the parent has limited proficiency. No Title III funds will be used to support these activities. 6 Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. Per session for after school and Saturday programming as described above. N/A Misc materials for instruction including Spanish language texts. N/A N/A N/A N/A Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits)  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL 12,000 N/A 366 N/A N/A N/A 12,366 7  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 01 School Name PS 142M - The Amalia Castro School Borough Manhattan School Number 142 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Daphna Gutman Coach type here ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Christie Lillard Teacher/Subject Area Kim Sherman/3rd grade Teacher/Subject Area Related-Service Provider type here Superintendent Daniella Phillips Assistant Principal Jaime Szymanski Coach type here School Counselor Sharon Levanoni Parent Minerva Flores Parent Coordinator Jackie Munoz Field Support Center Staff Member type here Other (Name and Title) type here C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 1 1 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 340 8 Total number of ELLs 33 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 9.71%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 3 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 4 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 2 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 5 0 0 0 0 0 0 6 0 0 7 0 0 8 0 0 9 0 0 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? To assess the early literacy skills of our ELLs at P.S. 142 we use formal and informal assessments. The formal assessments we use are Teachers College Running Records. At P.S. 142, we also use rubrics aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards to assess our students’ literacy skills, math, and language development. We have found that the majority of our ELLs score below grade level on literacy assessments due to limited English vocabulary and limited schooling prior to entering Kindergarten and/or the United States. Teachers use the information collected from all assessments to carefully understand the needs of our ELLs in order to plan targeted, customized lessons and supports. The assessments are used to differentiate instructional material and to set literacy goals for students. The information collected also helps inform the school of students who will need extra support through AIS (Academic Intervention Services), Extended Day, and small group tutoring. Teachers also conduct informal assessments, including ancedotals, conferences, writing samples etc. 9  2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? Assessments are used to differentiate instructional material during the school day and to determine which students need extra literacy support through AIS (Academic Intervention Services), Extended Day and small group tutoring. Reading level data is recorded monthly on Google Drive which is accessible to all teachers and administrators. In addition, reading conference notes are logged by classroom and ENL teachers in notebooks enabling all teachers to share observations and information about student progress and areas for growth each time they confer with a student. These are passed up each year creating a historical record of each student's reading development. Writing and math assessment data is recorded on Google Drive as well. The ENL teacher attends weekly grade meetings and Monday PD sessions to co-plan with classroom teachers for in-class instruction. The ENL teacher also attends DOE professional development in order to learn new skills and techniques and turnkey their findings to classroom teachers. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? We evaluate the success of our programs for ELLs by analyzing student NYSESLAT scores (focusing on their improvement in each modality, Reading/Writing and Speaking/Listening as well as overall performance levels). We also analyze guided reading level data monthly; this includes data from formal TCRWP running records and in-book assessments, as well as data collected through conferring and logged in conference notebooks. In kindergarten and first grade, sight word assessments are also used as are phonemic awareness assessments. In grades 3-5, teachers use NYS ELA and Math tests to assess student gains. Formal and informal assessments conducted by the ENL teacher and their classroom teacher provide additional ongoing information about the progress students are making in the classroom. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? When NYSESLAT scores and other summative data have been gathered, administration and the ENL provider analyze student scores. We assess whether students made sufficient progress in each modality and subject area. In response to findings, AIS services are modified to address demonstrated student needs. This may involve changing Extended Day curriculum and/or service provider subject area push-in. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] Once an ELL has been identified as needing additional support, the classroom teacher will provide the student with small group or individualized instruction as needs dictate. If the data collected by the teacher from small group instruction does not demonstrate student achievement, then that student will be recommended for AIS (Academic Intervention Services) to the School Implementation Team. Upon the SIT's recommendation, an AIS provider will be assigned to provide push-in services. After six weeks of AIS, all teachers that provide services for the student will revisit and discuss student progress. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. Thirty-two students took the NYSESLAT in Spring 2015. 5 students achieved a decision of Commanding. 10 students scored at an Intermediate level. Out of those 10, six of the students are in second or third grade. Eight students scored at a Beginner level. Out of those eight, four are in fourth grade. Six students scored at an Advanced level. Out of those six, two are in third grade. Majority of the students who scored at a Beginner level on the NYSESLAT and/or LAB-R are newcomers who have been in the US for one year or less. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? ELL data is available for all teachers to access through a shared school platform. At the beginning of the year the ENL teacher conferences with classroom teachers about students' ELL status as well as current and previous years NYSESLAT results, NYS ELA results, and NYS Math results. 0  Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. The ENL program at P.S. 142 prioritizes an integrated ENL model. ELL students are grouped wherever possible according to proficiency level to facilitate providing integrated services. The ENL teacher pushes in to provide support during ELA instructional time (either during Read Aloud, reading workshop or writing workshop), although if student need indicates that there is a greater need for support during content area instruction, modifications may be made to meet student needs. Unit plans are available electronically to all teachers. Classroom teachers share daily lesson plans in advance with the ENL teacher so that the ENL teacher can plan appropriately scaffolded and/or modified lessons for ELL students. The ENL teacher also meets with grade level teachers during planning time to coordinate instruction to better meet the needs of our ELL students. During the integrated service, the ENL teacher works with students in guided lessons, introducing vocabulary, building background knowledge, exploring words and word solving strategies and developing fluency and comprehension. In this way, the ENL teacher provides targeted instruction enabling the ELL student to access the curriculum. In addition to integrated service, students with English proficiency levels of Entering are provided with 180 minutes of stand-alone ENL instruction per week by the ENL teacher and students with English proficiency levels of Emerging are provided with 90 minutes of stand-alone ENL instruction per week by the ENL teacher as required. b. TBE program. If applicable. n/a c. DL program. If applicable. n/a 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? The ENL teacher first creates a table plotting out mandated minutes, methods and classrooms for each ELL students to see where the most beneficial groupings can be made. Students are grouped by grade and proficiency levels to optimize instruction. Then a schedule is drafted incorporating all methods of ENL instruction (stand alone/integrated) based on student proficiency levels. The ENL teacher then meets with the SETSS, Speech, OT and PT teams to make sure their schedules do not conflict and all mandates are met. The principal then reviews and approves the schedule. a. In the ENL program ENL and ELA instructional minutes are delivered using integrated and stand alone methods. The ENL teacher pushes into classrooms and provides appropriate scaffolding for ELA core content. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. Because the ENL teacher pushes in to support students in their classrooms during regular instruction, core content is automatically integrated into the ENL program. The ENL teacher has access to all unit plans and pacing maps for all grades serviced. She also is able to meet with grade teams for planning during common preparation time as well as Tuesday 1  afternoon professional work time. In this way, the ENL teacher is able to plan appropriate supports for ELLs that are implemented during regular instruction in English, and she can suggest to classroom teachers supports that they can integrate even when she is not pushing in. ELLs do not miss out on core content instruction, and supports provided by the ENL teacher are relevant and foster language development within the context of the learning done in class. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? P.S. 142 does not offer a Transitional Bilingual or Dual Language program. Teachers encourage students to use their home language skills as a building block to acquire English. Students are encouraged to write in their home language and continually implement the English they learn throughout the year to ultimately transition to writing completely in English. Students are also partnered with peers who speak their home language for content area discussions. This enables teachers to use formative assessment throughout the lesson. Spanish speaking students are assessed in their home language using the Spanish LAB. NYS Math exams and internal math exams are available in a variety of languages. Teachers and paraprofessionals in the building who speak Spanish and Chinese are called upon when necessary to assist with translation on assessments or other to facilitate other communication as well. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status All teachers at P.S. 142, all teachers differentiate instruction to meet the needs of the wide variety of students in their classrooms. To aid teachers in this work, at the beginning of each school year, each teacher receives a list of their English Language learners, which designates their level of language acquisition (entering, emerging, transitioning, expanding, and commanding). a. At this time, we have no SIFE students attending P.S. 142. b. Newcomers are assessed to determine language proficiency so that appropriate service can be provided. Those who are Entering or Emerging receive daily instruction using methodologies and approaches including, but not limited to, as Total Physical Response (TPR). The certified ENL teacher provides both integrated support during ELA instruction as well as stand alone instruction for more individualized, intensive language instruction where appropriate. The home language of newcomers is often used during early stages of language learning. A wide range of materials will be used to support instruction such as visual aids, manipulatives (particularly to reinforce letter-sound relationships), big books, vocabulary cards, various word study activity kits and texts with audio and visual supplements. c. Developing ELLs are supported with integrated ENL support. The certified ENL teacher works closely with the classroom teacher to anticipate language needs and provide pre-teaching or on-the-spot support as needed. Since writing was the weakest area on the recent NYSESLAT, developing ELLs are largely supported in the area of writing. This work includes organizing texts, developing complex sentences, and expanding range of vocabulary through root and affix analysis. d. We do not have any long term ELLs at this time. Should the need arise, however, for support of long term ELLs, we would ensure that these students continue to receive academic support through small group intervention. The classroom teacher and ENL teacher would work together to develop a structured immersion instructional program that allows for students to receive instruction that is tailored to specifically meet their needs. e. Former ELLs receive 90 minutes of integrated ENL services per week. The certified ENL teacher works with the classroom teacher to design a schedule that meets the needs of these students through integrated services. Various data sources are used to determine the optimal content including ELA exam data as well as classroom assignments. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? The ENL teacher, classroom teachers, and service providers of ELL-SWDs have access to a wide variety of instructional strategies and grade-level materials to provide students with access to academic content and guide students in accelerating English language development. All teachers begin with the students' IEPs to identify areas of need and accommodations that benefit the student. Grade level teams with special education service providers and ENL certified teachers to design materials 2  and identify effective strategies when unit planning. Teachers leverage technology including Smartboards, document cameras, and SmartTables to provide visual support (including pictures and videos). iPads and computers are available in the classroom for additional individualized auditory and visual support. Teachers utilize websites such as NEWSELA, Flocabulary, Reading A-Z as well as Spanish language copies of read-aloud texts, and the Fountas and Pinnell Leveled Literacy Intervention kit. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? To meet the diverse needs of ELL-SWDs, P.S. 142 allocates time for the service providers to meet at the beginning of the school year to plan out a schedule. Some of our ELL-SWDs receive more than one service, thus it is important that all service providers (APE, OP, PT, Speech, Guidance Counselor, SETSS, and ENL) meet to discuss which students will be pulled-out on what days and times. This allows all service providers to rearrange scheduling in order to offer integrated services multiple times a day so that the student is continuously supported. Students with Disabilities are programmed with their general education peers as often as possible including during lunch, recess, assemblies, and during science, gym, music, art, and where appropriate, in content areas. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. P.S. 142 has set up intervention programs for ELLs in ELA and math. All intervention services are provided in English with using the home language as support and are targeted to address the needs of the learners in each specific group. Intervention providers identify the needs of the student and provide the most appropriate intervention to meet those needs. Students struggling with organizing their thoughts into a paragraph might work with an intervention teacher in a small group using graphic organizers designed to specifically support the student when planning to write. Whereas, students struggling to decode text will be included in a small group during word study for customized instruction. Special needs students who are not proficient in English are provided with instructional support (a bilingual paraprofessional) as per IEP. Fountas and Pinnell Leveled Literacy Intervention kits are used during push-in AIS services for reading support. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? In the 2017-18 year, P.S. 142 will work to more strategically match integrated service provision with content areas of need. As much as possible, the ENL teacher will work with students in writing who have demonstrated (on NYSESLAT, ELA, and informal assessments) a greater need for writing support, while pushing in for reading for those students who have demonstrated a greater need in reading. This can be logistically challenging, as all students in the same classroom may not have the same content area need. This will also enable classroom teachers to witness strategies used by the ENL teacher and incorporate those strategies into their own work with students needing language support, thereby reinforcing the idea that all teachers are teachers of ELLs. During professional development and common planning time, teachers will work with the ENL teacher to differentiate instruction and plan supports for ELLs within their units. In 2017-18 we will be on-boarding a new ENL provider. No significant programmatic changes are anticipated. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? N/A 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. As students in heterogenously grouped classes, ELLs at P.S. 142 are afforded equal access to all school programs. ELLs participate in academic after school programs, visiting artist programs, Story Pirates, Cook Shop, Third Street Music, Chess and trips. ELLs also participate in extracurricular activities, including school trips, Art Club, Musical plays, Rosie's Broadway Kids, wiffleball, kickball, and the annual Science Fair. 3  12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. A variety of instructional materials are available to support ELLs. Listening centers, Smartboards, iPads, and computers are available in every classroom for all students to use. The ENL teacher has bilingual (Spanish/English)books, dictionaries, and literature at various language levels. Some read-aloud texts are available in Spanish as well as leveled Spanish texts, and content based text in Spanish. Fountas and Pinnell Leveled Literacy kits are used to support ELLs during guided reading instruction, as are resources from NEWSela. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? ELLs receive home language support through bilingual books, Spanish and Chinese texts and dictionaries. Teachers utilize translation software in order to translate content based vocabulary into students' home language. Students are also given the option to write in their home language as well as integrate both English and their Home language into their writing and speaking. ELLs with special needs also receive home language support through a bilingual paraprofessional, as per IEP. Several staff members are proficient in Spanish and Chinese and can act as translators when needed. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. Although ELLs at all grade levels are at various language levels, the services and resources that are provided are at students' appropriate grade and language level. Academic content is introduced to students at their appropriate grade level within their reading level. Students who are newcomers and are literate in their home language are also given the opportunity to participate in writing activities in their home language while they are building English language proficiency. These students are also given access to text in their home language to reinforce home language literacy and build upon the skills they have in their home language to attain English proficiency. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? We are co-located with Manhattan Charter School. We do not share resources or coordinate efforts regarding the needs of our ELL students. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). Prior to the first day of school P.S. 142 sends newsletters and pamphlets welcoming new parents to our school. These newsletters and pamphlets are translated for parents of ELLs. Over the summer, students are invited to attend the SITC ELL summer program. On the first day of school, the Parent Coordinator holds an orientation Parent Breakfast to welcome new and current parents to P.S. 142 and to answer any questions parents may have. During the school year the ENL teacher invites current ELLs to have lunch with them in small groups order to foster community in introduce new students. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? At this time, P.S. 142 does not offer foreign language electives. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? N/A 4  Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? 1. The ENL teacher at P.S. 142, along with ELL personnel from the Manhattan Field Support Center offer professional development for our general education and special education teachers. The ENL teacher plans to attend a Fundations professional development in the 2017-2018 school year as well as at least two more ELL focused professional developments. The ENL teacher will then turnkey their findings during an in-school professional development to classroom teachers. Professional development is offered every Monday after school to all teachers (including ENL teachers). Much of this work is focused on developing and refining curriculum and instructional strategies to better meet the needs of all of our students, including ELLs. One Monday per month will be devoted to revising unit plans to include instructional supports for ELLs. The ENL teacher in addition to the principal and assistant principal will support teachers in this work. A second Monday will be devoted to looking at student work to determine student needs and assess the efficacy of our instruction. ELLs will be a primary focus of this work. The ENL teacher is also a member of the school Equity Team, which is engaged in ongoing learning, discussing and planning for how to make our school a more equitable learning environment for all (including ELLs). 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. General Education and Special Education teachers attend ELL training at least for 15% of their professional development. This training consists of attending professional development sessions that focus on working with ELLs and workshops led by the ENL teacher at P.S. 142 as well as staff from the Manhattan Field Support Center. Records of attendance at all Monday professional development sessions are kept on file in the main office. Workshops focus on several different topics including, understanding language development for ELLs (BICS and CALP), changing classroom environment to meet the needs of ELLs in the classroom, building understanding of individual ELLs in our own classrooms through case studies and interviews, and activities teachers can use to differentiate instruction for ELLs. These workshops are also focused on strategies and techniques that classroom teachers can use with ELLs to encourage ELLs to participate in class conversations, to be engaged in reading and writing activities, and to be active participants in the learning that occurs in the classroom. The ENL teacher allocates at least 50% of training to ELL specific professional development. On October 2-3, 2017, the ENL teacher will attend a mini-institute at Teachers College Reading and Writing Project entitled, "Adapting Units of Study for English Language Learners, Grades K-5." Upon her return, she will turnkey this information to classroom teachers. On November 7, 2017, the ENL teacher will attend a workshop provided by Teachers College Reading and Writing Project entitled "Develop a Toolkit of Methods to Support English Language Learners in Becoming Stronger Readers and Writers." On November 28. 2017, the ENL teacher will attend a workshop provided by TCRWP entitled, "Ramping Up Shared Reading, Shared Writing, and Interactive Writing to Support Grammar and Writing Conventions for English Language Learners." Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? 1. Families of ELLS will be invited to meetings to discuss the goals of the program and student performance/ progress during our Parent Engagement evening in January. Outreach by telephone and/or in person at pick-up/drop-off will be made if 5  needed. At these meetings the ENL teacher will discuss progress and provide suggestions for additional programming (e.g. enrollment in Extended Day or Saturday Academy) if appropriate. The ENL teacher will also provide parents will suggestions for supporting students at home. Parents who cannot attend this scheduled meeting in January will be offered alternative times and/or a phone conference with interpretation by another staff member or NYC DOE translation service. 2. Parents of all students, including ELLs, are given the opportunity to be directly involved in their child’s learning. Parents and family members are invited to Family Friday every month. These visits give parents and children the opportunity to explore their child's classroom community. Parents are also invited to attend Parent Breakfast meetings led by the Parent Coordinator and administration to discuss school activities, attend academic workshops, and meet with other parents and members of the community. Translation services are provided at all school events. These translators are members of the school community that speak the language (primarily Chinese and Spanish). In the event that we have a language that is not available for translation by in-house staff, P.S. 142 will reach out to the Department of Education's translation unit. In addition, the certified ENL teacher will meet at least once annually with the parents of each ENL student to discuss their academic progress. She will keep a record of each interaction with parents. After-school parent engagement time as well as other time is used for this purpose. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. We plan numerous opportunities to foster involvement of parents of ELLs. Once each month, we host Family Friday. On these mornings, parents are invited into our classrooms to participate in lessons with their children during first period. Following that, a workshop is held for parents at which translation is provided. These workshops vary in content from how to help your child with homework to strategies for communicating with children about discipline. Our school's parent coordinator offers family Cookshop workshops monthly. In addition to this, we partner with Henry Street Settlement to offer open hours for counseling and referral for job placement, housing, legal, and immigration services. Also this year, we are partnering with Cabrini Immigrant Services to offer workshops for parents on immigrant rights as well as other topics relevant to parents of ELLs. All of our written communication with parents is distributed in English as well as alternative home languages. Teachers use the Parent Engagement time on Tuesday afternoons to meet with parents and/or speak with parents on the phone. The DOE translation service is used by teachers when needed for phone conversations. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. 6 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Daphna Gutman, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 7  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: P.S. 142 School DBN: 01M142 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Daphna Gutman Title Principal Jaime Szymanski Assistant Principal Jacqueline Munoz Parent Coordinator Christie Lillard ENL/Bilingual Teacher Minerva Flores Parent Kim Sherman Teacher/Subject Area Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach School Counselor Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 10/26/17 10/26/17 10/26/17 10/26/17 10/26/17 10/26/17 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 8  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 01M142 School Name: P.S. 142 Superintendent: Carry Chan The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Jacqueline Munoz Parent Coordinator Yes Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. We determine language preferences of the parent community in several ways. We use the Home Language Identification Survey. We also use data indicated on the Student Emergency Contact cards. Finally, we distribute a Family Survey to parents/guardians that asks communication preferences as well as language preferences. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral English 344 70.64 339 69.61 9  Spanish Chinese Arabic Mandinka (AKA Mandingo) Tibetan Wolof 126 14 1 1 0 1 25.87 2.87 .21 .21 0 .21 130 14 1 1 1 1 26.69 2.87 .21 .21 .21 .21 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. English, Spanish Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency How do you plan Distributed to to translate? Families Include Family Handbook, Family Survey, School Calendar, Curriculum Night Materials, September/October calendar Parent-Teacher Conference Notifications, After School Invitations, Family Friday flyer, November calendar Report Cards, Harvest Feast Invitation, Family Friday flyer, December calendar School Vacation Notices, Winter Show invitation, Family Friday flyer, January calendar At Risk Notifications, Principal's New Year's Letter, Family Friday flyer, February calendar September procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. Documents are translated into Spanish by the parent coordinator. Documents are translated into Chinese by our Chinese-speaking paraprofessional. Documents are translated into Russian using Google Translate and edited by a 0 Russian-speaking staff member. Over-the-Phone interpretation services are provided for low-incidence languages. In addition, Class Dojo is used for communication with families and all messages are translated by this app as requested by the user. Parent Teacher Conference Notifications, Family Friday flyer, March calendar October Report Cards, NYS Testing Information, Family Friday flyer, April calendar Vacation Notices, NYS Testing Reminder, Family Friday flyer, May calendar Parent Night information, At-Risk Notifications, Science Night Flyer, Art Show Flyer, 5th grade graduation information, K moving up information, June calendar Promotional information, Report Cards November December January 1  February March April May 2  June 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide November and March We will hold Parent-Teacher Conferences to discuss student progress and the formal report card. ENL Parent Information Night October Curriculum Night September We will also have Family Fridays once per month followed by a parent workshop. October-May At-Risk Meetings January and May interpretation service(s)? Bilingual paraprofessionals, social workers, and the parent coordinator provide translation services for parents during these meetings as needed. Bilingual teachers will translate without assistance. In addition, the report cards have been translated into Chinese and Spanish. Over-the-phone translation will be used for low-incidence languages. Bilingual paraprofessionals, social workers, and the parent coordinator provide translation services for parents during these meetings as needed. Bilingual paraprofessionals, social workers, and the parent coordinator provide translation services for parents during these meetings. Bilingual teachers will translate without assistance. Over-the-phone translation will be used for low-incidence languages. The parent coordinator translates during the parent workshop, if presenters require translation. Over-the-phone translation will be used for low-incidence languages. Bilingual paraprofessionals, social workers, and the parent coordinator provide translation services for parents 3  during these meetings as needed. Bilingual teachers will translate without assistance. Over-the-phone translation will be used for low-incidence languages. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. The messaging system through Class Dojo offers translation into home languages. In addition, the parent coordinator, teachers, and paraprofessionals who speak Spanish, Russian, and/or Chinese offer translation. The Language Line can also assist for low-incidence languages. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Chancellor's Regulation A-663 will be included in the Staff Handbook for 2017-18. Staff will have opportunity to review this regulation in full during staff orientation in September 2017. The parent coordinator will ensure that all written communication from the school to families is translated prior to dissemination. (Funds are allocated to compensate the Chinese-speaking paraprofessional for written translation.) She will also ensure that interpretation is provided for one-on-one meetings whenever requested and always for group meetings. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) P.S. 142 is committed to the assessment and identification of our students' parents’ linguistic needs. We have planned to meet these needs, and fulfill Section VII of Chancellor's Regulations A-663 in the following ways: by making our school a welcoming atmosphere for parents who speak languages other than English through the use of multilingual signage and public address, by informing parents of their parental rights and responsibilities, including their right to translation and interpretation services, by informing parents of upcoming citywide educational events, by providing translation services at all workshops and meetings, and by offering information to parents about students’ health, safety and conduct in their native language. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services 4  Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? Our annual parent survey is one formal way we gather feedback from parents on the quality and availability of services. (Translated parent surveys are available on the Translation and Interpretation Unit's Intranet page.) However, we also gather this information informally on an on-going basis. As all of our staff members interact with parents, they gather this information from parents and share it with school leadership so that we can make decisions that best meet the needs of our families. 5 
