 05M161 School Name: P.S. 161 PEDRO ALBIZU CAMPOS Principal: PATRICIA BALBUENA 2018-19 CEP-CS 1  Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC)   Section 1: School Information Page School Information School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Don Pedro Albizu Campos 3105000010161 K-8 School Number (DBN): 05M161 499 West 133 rd Street, New York, NY 10027 (212) 690 - 5945 (917) 507 - 0524 Phone Number: Fax: Patricia Balbuena-Rivera pbalbue@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: Email Address: Patricia Balbuena-Rivera Peggy Girtman-Atkins Claudia Pineda Peggy Girtman-Atkins SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: SindannyPizinni none none none Geographical District: 05 District Information DanikaRux Superintendent: 425 West 123 rd Street, New York, NY 10027 Superintendent’s Office Address: DRux@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: (212) 769 – 7500 Phone Number: (212) 769 – 7619 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC)   Manhattan FSC: YuetChu Executive Director: 333 7th Avenue, 8th floor, New York, NY 10001 Executive Director’s Office Address: ychu@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: (646) 470-0721 Phone Number: (212) 356-7564 Fax:   Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Patricia Balbuena-Rivera Peggy Girtman-Atkins Jackie Delgado SindiannyPizzini n/a n/a n/a Karina Espertin Coral Zayas Mary Reide Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/ Teacher Member/ Teacher Member/ Teacher   Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Ryan Cannata Judith Soto-Solivan Latoya Geter Olabisi Alarape Ana Roberts-Romain Deborah Shand Osiris Bernal Tyhesha Smith Dominga Mateo de Perez Member/ Teacher Member/ Teacher Member/ DC 37 Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent   Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with   the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement   Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Our mission at PS/MS 161 is to foster in all of our students the skills that assist them to become independent thinkers, problem-solvers and lifelong learners. We provide an environment where children are an integral part of a community and hold themselves and each other to the highest standards of performance. The close-knit atmosphere permits each child, parent, and staff member to feel safe, recognized, and respected.   2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. Don Pedro Albizu Campos recognizes that we have a mandate to create educated, healthy, civically responsible, and globally aware world citizens. We strive to instill an academic foundation that will lead to fulfillment of the individuals greatest ambitions and desires. We will impart a social consciousness that recognizes the students’ pride in their cultural heritage and a sense of responsibility to community as well as self. Our school has approximately 850 students. 28% of our students are English Language Learners ("ELL"s); 25% of our students are Students with Disabilities ("SWD"s). 74% of our students are Latino or Hispanic; 20% are African American. As we continue to grow, we continue to develop better ways to address the advancement for all of these sub-populations. The collaboration of an entire community of staff, students, families, neighborhood, and private sector drive the reality of a thriving academic institution that is a constantly evolving institution of learning. There are many private and public resources that want to assist the growth and opportunities that a Title 1 Public school can offer. With a mindset of active pursuit of opportunities in the realm of grants, collaborative learning, and enrichment scenarios, across a wide array of choices, we have been fortunate to provide a school that can reach a multiple interests and talents of many of our students. Through performance and studio arts, debate and chess, and a full range of sports and physical development, we provide a plethora of experiences that most of our community would have difficulty obtaining without outside support. We are entering into our third year as an Apple ConnectED School, wherein every student and staff member has been provided with an Apple iPad, allowing our students to become global learners who engage through personalized learning, communicate and collaborate effectively, provide and receive authentic feedback, build skills through meaningful projects, and take ownership of their education to solve real world problems. In addition to the iPads, the ConnectED program has provided all teachers with MacBook Air laptops, allowing greater collaboration, as well as increased building–wide broadband connectivity and technologically-oriented academic professional development. Our technology configuration is one of the finest in the city, also including 2 full technology labs, computers in every classroom, over 60 Chromebooks, interactive whiteboards in all classrooms, document projectors and wireless connectivity throughout the premises. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. We are a population of 850 students. 74% of our students are Latino, 20% are African American. Our school’s Economic Need Index is 86; many of our children receive a multitude of services and support that fall outside the realm of traditional schooling. 28% of our children are ELLs and 25% are SWDs. We do not however allow the neighborhood conditions to be a source for excuses or lack of success. There are no acceptable outcomes except to do what is necessary and provide our children with the best teaching, opportunity, encouragement, and resources to create the scholars of tomorrow. Our motto is, Creating the Future of Harlem, One Child at a Time. We address every individual as one who has strengths and weaknesses and teach to those traits. We rely extensively on analytical data and interpretation of how to structure personal pedagogy to increase student learning. We develop our staff to be the best and brightest, through a firm commitment to professional learning. We create dynamic outside partnerships to provide enrichment, resources, and opportunities to our community in order to supplement what is provided by city and state caused by limited funding. We search and apply for grants, Donor Choose funding and any other resources that will increase the offerings to all in our community. We pride ourselves on being a community of pro activists. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. In reference to the Framework for Greater Schools elements, our school made the most progress in the area of Strong Family-Community Ties, increasing from a score of 3.33 to a 3.77. Our area of focus for this school year is on Rigorous Instruction, as our score decreased from 2.72 to 2.60. 0  1  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 05M161 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration PK,0K,01,02,03,04,05,06,07,08 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 838 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language YES Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 77 77 25 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 54 49 30 14 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 96.0% % Attendance Rate 95.0% % Reduced Lunch 26.7% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.4% 74.1% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 2.0% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 0.08 1% 15% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 27.7% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 76% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A NO N/A NO NO Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A NO N/A NO NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A NO N/A YES NO High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 82 85 5 89.9% 1.4% 24.8% 20.6% 2.1% 1.1% 4 16% 6.4 25.3% 28% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No NO N/A N/A NO NO NO N/A N/A NO NO YES N/A N/A NO NO N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. On the 2018 NYC School Survey, PS/MS 161 scored a 2.90. According to the Survey, 161's strongest area is Course Clarity, with responses 2% better than the City average and 6% better than the District average. In most other areas, 161 was close to the City average, but the responses related to Quality of Student Discussion were poor. The responses were 17% below the City average and 13% below the District average. During the school’s 2017 Quality Review (January 19-20, 2017), PS/MS 161 demonstrated Proficiency in the area of assessment (2.2). The school was evaluated as Developing in the areas of curriculum (1.1) and teacher pedagogy (1.2). In the area of curriculum, the Reviewer found that instructional shifts have not yet been purposefully integrated into the curricula. In the area of pedagogy, the Reviewer found that there were uneven levels of student-to-student discussions across classrooms. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, as a result of all teachers of all content areas planning and implementing data-driven instruction, 3% more students in grades 3-8 will achieve proficiency levels of 3 or 4 on the spring 2019 New York State ELA and Math exams, as compared to the percentage of students in grades 3-8 who achieved proficiency levels of 3 or 4 on the spring 2018 New York State ELA and Math exams. 3  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) We are implementing a variety of research-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. a. We will measure the impact of these initiatives on student performance through benchmark exams, unit assessments, and running record reading assessments. b. We will measure the impact of these initiatives on teacher performance through observation cycles and periodic walk-throughs. a. All teachers K-8th a. Oct 2018, Jan 2019 and June 2019 b. All teachers K-8th 1. All teachers K-8th b. Oct 2017, Dec 2017, Jan-Feb 2018, Mar-Apr 2018 a. Administration and coaches b. Administration 1. School Instructional Focus Promoting Rigorous Instruction: PS/MS 161's school-wide goal is to improve student outcomes through greater planning and preparation, with a particular emphasis on differentiation and conceptual understanding. Teachers will work to improve lessons and units in all content areas with a focus on 5 areas: depth of knowledge; questioning & discussion techniques; differentiated instruction; formative assessment; and conceptual understanding. 2. Professional Learning Teams (Teacher Teams): Teachers meet in grade level (K-5) or content based (6-8) teams once a week. Teacher teams will engage in cycles of work, by looking at students work to guide instruction, with a particular emphasis on differentiation and conceptual understanding. Through cycles of work that are aligned with 1. School year 2018/2019 2. All teachers K-8th 2. School year 2018/2019 1. Administrators and coaches 2. Administrators and coaches 4  the curriculum units, teachers will collaborate with their colleagues to strengthen their instruction. 3. Literacy Staff Development 1. Grades K-5 Classroom teachers in grades K-3 and ELA teachers in grades 4-8 will meet in grade based teams with a staff developer and the literacy coach ten times this school year. They will plan for the implementation of Common Core based Units of Study for Reading and Writing Workshop as developed by the Teachers College Reading and Writing Project. These sessions will focus on executing the fundamental pieces of the workshop structure (modeling, student practice, and student independent work) as well as linking all components of balanced literacy to meet the needs of all levels of students in each class. The other components include Guided Reading, Shared Reading, Interactive/Shared Writing, and Word Work and each component allows teachers to differentiate for all students’ needs. Teachers will also be asked to continually analyze formative data from class work and assessments to guide their planning for all components of Balanced Literacy with a focus on differentiating their instruction to meet all students’ needs, especially for those students who are not meeting grade level benchmark assessment expectations. Teachers will participate in cycles of work with the literacy coach based on student assessment data, formal teacher ratings data, classroom observations, and professional background with workshop instruction. 4. Math Staff Developers PS/MS 161 has worked with a Southern Cross Consultancy Math Coach developer (formerly an Aussie Math consultant) for the past eight years. PS/MS 161 has also worked with a Generation Ready staff developer (also formerly an Aussie Math consultant) for the past six years with our middle school teachers of grades 6 - 8. Our staff of K - 8 teachers meets monthly, by grade, for professional development workshops based on the latest common core teaching practices. The goal 3A. K-3 classroom and 4-8 ELA teachers 3A. School year 2018/2019 3A. Administrators, literacy coaches, staff developer 5  is to develop our teachers into strong confident pedagogues with the necessary expertise to teach to the new Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS). Developing our teachers’ expertise will enable students to learn in deeper and more meaningful ways. With our consultants, our teacher grade teams work collaboratively to analyze data across their grade and design learning solutions tailored to the needs of our school. Yearly we create a math-pacing calendar to align with the grade goals of the Common Core. Our Math Coaches continually monitor and model new methods of presenting math content. Teaching to the CCLS has required our teachers to enact new strategies for teaching math skills and concepts. Within mathematics, students must persevere to solve complex problems and describe their thinking using mathematical language and higher order thinking skills. Our teachers facilitate this by an increased emphasis in improved questioning and discussion techniques. Professional Development (PD) topics are chosen based on the needs of the teachers. Through analysis of last years NY State math test (using data from the Item analysis) we have identified areas of student weakness that must be strengthened. A. Southern Cross Consultancy (K-5) PD’s include the modeling of every element in our math curriculum. -Number talks are modeled for teachers to help children build fluency in mental math and apply computational strategies. -CGI is modeled as a component of our curriculum. Using word problems, or math stories, the teacher learns to model all abstract ideas with visual cues: using numbers, symbols, objects, diagrams, and graphic representation (charts, tables, graphs) to clarify and simplify the problem to be solved. CGI focuses on what students know and helps them to build future understanding based on their present knowledge. Students are challenged to represent their math understanding. -Lesson Tiering addressing the needs of our school population is another discussion our teacher teams are working on. This addresses the needs of our highest performing students, average students, at risk students, ELL’s and SWD’s. -Labsite visits are used for teachers to observe new strategies that are modeled for the children. Teachers are observed by other teachers in their grade and debriefed on the noticings and wonderings observed. 6  The consultant provides feedback to teachers based on their classroom observations and student performance. This is used to guide our work during teacher teams as a way to impacting teacher effectiveness and student outcome. B. Generation Ready Staff Development (6-8) The middle school math consultant has many forms of professional development. -Lesson/Unit Planning: Consultant leads effective unit planning sessions with the each grade in order to support our diverse learners. -Differentiation/Engagement: Consultant brings hands on instructional games that are to be used during stations and small group. Teachers are then to find additional sources to continue building a toolkit to have available in order to support our students with special needs and our ELL’s. -Classroom Visits: Provide teachers with feedback in order to continue to enhance their instruction. 5. Teacher Support in Rigorous Instruction for Literacy 1. Balanced Literacy Practices: School-Wide Research based instructional program: Teachers College Reading and Writing Curriculum serving Grades K-8. School-wide teachers college reading and writing instructional program is utilized and facilitated for Literacy immersion, acquisition, and comprehension in reading and writing. Teachers support the reading and writing units by the components of balanced literacy: Word Work, (Donald Bear) The Read Aloud, Shared Reading/Writing, and Independent Practice supporting transference of skill-strategy work. During independent practice students retain and apply skills based on the goals of the units, mini-bends, and own reading and writing goals based on their baseline independent reading level and the baseline of their genre based writing scale score. Teachers college reading units supports Common Core expectations of expository text and fictional text. The writing units support Common Core Expectations of Narrative, Opinion/Argumentative, and Informational Text. Read Aloud Work supports DOK of comprehension work and Danielson’s Framework of 3b. Questioning and Discussion. 2. Supporting City and Common Core Shifts: Common Core City and Common Core Shifts identify building 4A. K-5th classroom teachers 4A. School year 2018/2019 4A. Administrators, math coaches, Southern Cross staff developer 7  knowledge through content rich non-fiction and informational reading, text dependency, and complex text and academic vocabulary. Teacher’s College reading curriculum is comprised of nine units addressing reading genres of fiction and expository text as well as a myriad of genres during student independent reading. The Read Aloud meets the instructional shifts of text dependency, complex text, and academic vocabulary. Students based on their reading level transfer these skills to independent reading. Teachers support and enrich complexity of text and text dependency during conferring, strategy, and guided reading. 3. Common Core Aligned Assessments, Rubrics and Learning Progressions: Teachers will use Common Core aligned assessments in literacy throughout the school year and analyze the resulting data to inform their unit and lesson plans for whole class instruction and differentiation for individual student needs. In reading, students will be assessed using Concepts About Print, Letter/Sound ID, High Frequency Words, and running record assessments. Data from such assessments will be used to plan especially for small group, differentiated instruction such as Guided Reading and Word Work. Students will also be assessed periodically using released passages and questions (multiple choice and constructed response) from past NY State ELA exams. The resulting data will be analyzed and used to plan for components of Balanced Literacy such as Reading Workshop and Shared/Close Reading. Teachers will use rubrics and learning progressions as developed by the Teachers College Reading and Writing Project that align to Common Core standards in narrative, informational, and opinion/argument writing. 6a. Teacher Support in Rigorous Instruction for Mathematics (K-5) The PS/MS 161 K-5 Math curriculum is based on the Common Core Learning Standards supported by the Investigations 3 Curriculum, Guided Math, CGI (Cognitive Guided Instruction) Number talks, Exemplars and ST Math. All of this is set into the pacing calendar that teachers worked out with Coaches and 4B. 6th-8th Math teachers 4B. School year 2018/2019 4B. Administrators, math coach, Generation Ready staff developer 8  Math Consultants last year. Our Math instruction is based on the Workshop model incorporating tiered and differentiated instruction into each lesson. The CCLS Math units are designed to achieve a balance among concepts, skills and problem solving. Aligned to the CCLS standards, these units stress rigorous concept development and real world applications while maintaining a strong emphasis on computational and procedural skills. In every grade students are encouraged to reason mathematically, to evaluate mathematical arguments, formally and informally, to use the language of mathematics to communicate ideas and information precisely and to make connections among mathematical topics and to other disciplines. Guided Math -Guided math is done once a week (Fridays) enabling teachers to regroup their students according to the data gathered during that weeks lessons and assessments. On the day chosen to do Guided Math, students are grouped based on their most pressing needs. Guided Math is an opportunity for students to work with teacher guidance and/or independently in order to build solid math skills, concepts and strategies. Small homogeneous groups of students receive individualized instruction. This provides scaffolding to support the learning efforts of students and increases the interaction between teacher and student. On the Task Board are the groups with the assigned task and the students who will be in that group. The teacher works with one group on a particular skill while the other 2 or 3 groups are working independently. CGI (Cognitive Guided Instruction) - CGI is scheduled two times each week. Using word problems, or math stories, the teacher models all abstract ideas with visual cues: using numbers, symbols, objects, diagrams, and graphic representation (charts, tables, graphs) to clarify and simplify the problem to be solved. CGI focuses on what students know and helps them to build future understanding based on their present knowledge. Students are challenged to represent their math understanding. Number Talks - Number talks are scheduled for 3 sessions a week Its purpose is to build fluency in mental math and computation strategies. The problem in a number talk are designed to elicit specific strategies that focus on number relationships and number theory. The number talks are aligned to the CCLS. 5A. K-5th classroom teachers and 6th-8th ELA teachers 5A. School year 2018/2019 5A. Administrators and literacy coaches 9  Exemplars: Problem solving - Exemplars are open ended word problems. They provide teachers with a way of teaching and assessing problem solving and communication skills. Students solve a similar problem to one they have seen modeled. Students must provide all the thinking that goes into solving it. 5B. K-5th classroom teachers and 6th-8th ELA teachers ST Math -Created by Mind Research Institute, ST Math is a computer game-based instructional program designated to boost math comprehension and proficiency through visual learning. Designed to be integrated with classroom instruction. Twice a week, classes in grades 1 - 4 come to the lab with their teacher and follow their own learning path. Teachers monitor student understanding by circulating through the lab and assisting students when necessary. 6b. Teacher Support in Rigorous Instruction for Mathematics (6-8) The PS/MS 161 Middle School Mathematics team uses a wide range of resources in order to meet our students’ needs. Our curriculum follows the Common Core Learning Standards and is complemented by the curriculum resource programs such as CMP3 (Connected Math Program 3), Engage NY, Ready. These curriculums are aligned to the CCLS and mathematical practices as outlined by NYSED, and help ensure that academic rigor and higher- order thinking skills are commonplace in the middle school math classrooms. Teachers collaborate on the pacing and sequence of the units during common planning time, to ensure coherence and fluency. Units are adapted and modified to support the needs of our 6 - 8 grade students. As such, we select the certain investigations from CMP3 as well as lessons from Engage NY, and Ready. We find what works best for our population and create our pacing calendars accordingly. At teachers discretion, special education classes supplement Connected Math Program with Go Math (6-8). We continue to implement the PS/MS 161 schoolwide Math curriculum expectations, structures, and routines such as 5C. K-5th classroom teachers and 6th-8th ELA teachers 5B. School year 2018/2019 5C. School year 2018/2019 5B. Administrators and literacy coaches 5C. Administrators and literacy coaches 0  math instruction must be data driven and should include tiered/differentiated lessons, small group instruction. 7. At-Risk Reading & Writing: RTI, A Response to Intervention 1. Tier 1 Instruction: Classroom Instruction: Teachers College expects students to be and maintain their reading level throughout the school year to meet Common Core expectations, rigor, and comprehension of fiction and informational texts. Students who fall below grade level in reading, the classroom teachers provide Tier 1 Instruction by identifying students on their just right reading level and providing tailored reading and writing strategies during independent time and creating strategy and guided groups to meet their reading need. For reading, teachers utilize bands of reading levels (A-Z) for independent and guided reading strategies. In writing, teachers utilize Common Core Scale Writing Rubrics and Learning Progressions in Narrative, Argumentative, and Informational Writing to meet student writing components in structure, development, and convention (spelling and editing) B. RTI Tier 2 Work: Outside classroom: Small group work 4-6 students on same reading level - In Tier 2 work, students who did not meet reading benchmark or periodic reading levels are identified as Tier 2 Students for reading intervention outside the classroom. Teachers submit four students for each cycle who did not meet Tier 1 Expectation. Students are serviced by a Reading Interventionist. Fountas & Pinnell, research based leveled literacy kits are used for reading intervention. Students are taught self-monitoring of prior knowledge, miscues, fluency, and comprehension through leveled guided reading texts. At the end of the cycle, students’ independent levels are re-assessed by Teacher’s College running records. A reflection sheet is provided for each child identifying, strengths, supports, and current reading level. In the next cycle, teachers submit new students of RTI Tier 2 work and/or resubmit below the grade level reading benchmark for RTI Tier 3 Work. 6a. K-5th classroom teachers 6a. School year 2018/2019 6a. Administrators and math coaches 1  2  3  6-8 math teachers 6b. School year 2018/2019 b. Administrators and math coaches 4  7A. School year 2018/2019 7A. K-5th classroom 5  teachers and 6th-8th ELA teachers 7B. Literacy Cluster Teachers Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). 7B. School year 2018/2019 1. School year 2018/2019 7A. Administrators and literacy coaches 7B. Administrators and literacy coaches, RTI teacher 1. Administrators 2. Administrators and coaches Scheduling 1. ENL Push-In English Language Learners are supported by push-in ENL specialists. Students are identified for push-in group work by the NYSESLAT score. Push-in teachers work with students based on their reading levels and writing results. ENL push-in teachers follow grade appropriate Teachers College Reading and Writing curriculum. 2. Dual Language Program: K-6 For those parents who opt to place their children in Dual Language classrooms, PS/MS 161 has a Dual Language Program to service the needs of bilingual and ENL students. To accelerate language acquisition (immersion) learning and comprehension in all subject area, students are taught one 1. ENL push-in teachers 2. Dual language teachers K-6 6  day in Spanish and one day in English. ENL minutes are provided in the classroom by bilingual certified teachers. 2. School year 2018/2019 3. ENL in the classroom K-8 The needs of ELLs are met in the classroom by identification of reading level and grade end of the year benchmark in writing pertaining to the writing genre. ELLs read on their independent reading level and apply teacher modeled strategies pertaining to their level. Students are grouped accordingly in strategy and guided reading groups for accelerated learning. In writing, students are identified on a Common Core aligned scale rubric based on the components structure, elaboration, and conventions. Teachers benchmark students based on the end of the year writing benchmark and utilized learning progressions to close gaps or teacher next grade level expectations. 4.Special Education Students Special Education students in grades K-8 are serviced in self-contained special education classrooms and Integrated Co Teaching(ICT) classes. Two teachers in ICT classes service the needs of general education students and student with IEP’s. Teachers follow the TC reading and writing curriculum where students are benchmarked on reading and writing grade level benchmarks for appropriate tailoring of instruction to meet grade level outcomes and academic needs of students. Special Education students are also serviced by SETTS teachers. Students are pulled out for tailored instruction to meet their needs for grade level academic outcomes. 5.Chess Club: For strategic and reflective thinking. 3. All classroom and cluster teachers 4. Teachers and paraeducators in ICT and self-contained classes. 3. School year 2018/2019 4. School year 2018/2019 3. Administrators and coaches 4. Administrators 7  6.Debate: PS/MS 161 has been a member of the NYC Urban Debate League since 2012. The school competes against top NYC teams in rigorous academic competition. Even among strong programs like Berkeley Carroll, Anderson School, and Hunter, PS/MS 161 has rapidly emerged as a home to powerhouse debaters, consistently ranking as one of the top middle school teams at the Urban Debate League tournaments. For PS/MS161's 50+ member team, Debate has created access to elite educational spaces, and unlocked enormous academic potential. Through giving hundreds of speeches, students develop poise, critical thinking, civic engagement and confidence. 7.College Awareness: Students study and visit colleges, setting goals for their lives as scholars. 5. Library Media Specialist 6. Administrators 7. Administrators 5.Teachers and Chess Coach from Chess in the Schools 6. Arts Coordinator 7. Middle school teachers 5. School year 2018/2019 6. School year 2018/2019 8  7. School year 2018/2019 School year 2018/2019 Literacy & Math Coaches, Parent Coordinator, Parents, All Teachers, Administration Activities that address the Capacity Framework element of Trust K-8 Parents All School, inclusive The capacity framework entails instructional guidance, teacher empowerment, student centered activities, effective leadership and strong parent community-collaboration. Activities that support these components are as follows:  Teacher Professional Learning teams Literacy and Math Coach Cycle Work & Debriefings  Tuesday Parental Time  Parental Workshops   Grade Level Teacher Team Meetings  Tailored Instruction based on identification of year long reading levels and Common Core Grade Level Writing Benchmarks  Coach and Admin Meeting: Setting Teacher Goals and Instructional Shifts  Coach Meetings: Supporting Teachers and School-wide initiatives and expectations  Data systems to drive instruction and academic outcomes 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. 1. Parent Workshops at PS/MS 161 are organized by the parent coordinator, and are facilitated by the Literacy and Mathematics Coaches. Parent workshops focus on understanding the Literacy & Mathematics Development of Students, periodic and end of the year Common Core Standards, and specific reading, writing, and mathematical strategies to support students at home. Parents are given handouts (i.e Benchmark reading levels, Tips for parents on each grade level) for parent education and review. Parent workshops will continue throughout the school-year promoting engagement and education. (Parent Coordinator) 9  2. PS/MS 161 Tuesday Parent Time & Support: 2:20-3:00 Tuesdays parent time offers parents the opportunity to meet with K-8 teachers about their child’s progress as well as teachers informing parents of pertinent strategies to support past and current units in all subject areas. Teachers also address Common Core Learning standards by distributing to teachers benchmark grade level Common Core expectations, tailored homework based on student need for meeting periodic and end-of the year benchmarks, and grade level letters informing parents of “what to expect for the unit.” (All Teachers) Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Human Resources ● Classroom Teachers for Scheduled Programs ● Teachers work per session to teach after-school to targeted students ● TC Staff Developers ● RTI Literacy Clusters ● Literacy Coaches Instructional Resources ● TC Reading and Writing Curriculum ● Teachers College Resources Website ● TC Staff Development Resources (i.e narratives, learning progression, planning for insides the classroom) ● TC Assessment Pro (data input and growth) Schedule Adjustments ● TC Staff Development Days, 4 cycles 10 sessions for Fall- 2017-Spring 2018 ● Self-Contained ENL classrooms ● Debate inclusive into elective schedule Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A C4E X 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 0  In January 2019, 3% more students in grades 3-8 will achieve benchmark levels of 3 or 4 on their Running Record assessments, as compared to the percentage of students in grades 3-8 who achieved benchmark levels of 3 or 4 in September 2018 on the same assessment. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) Progress will be measured using TCRWP Running Record assessments. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 1  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? PS/MS 161 was evaluated as “Well Developed” in the area of high expectations during its January 2017 Quality Review. On the 2018 NYC School Survey, PS/MS 161 scored a 3.16 in the area of Supportive Environment. The school's strongest area on the School Survey was related to Guidance, scoring 7% above the City average. 161 was also above the City average in questions related to Safety and in questions related to Personal Attention and Support. The school's weakest areas according to the Survey were Social-Emotional ( 11% below the City average) and Preventing Bullying (12% below the City average). The school's attendance figures continue to fall below the city's expectations. In the 2015-16 school year, approximately 63% of students had an attendance rate of 90% or greater. In the 2016-17 school year, approximately 66% of students had an attendance rate of 90% or greater. In the 2017-18 school year, approximately 64% (tentative figure) of students had an attendance rate of 90% or greater. Our area of focus continues to be on improving our percentage of students with an attendance rate of 90% or greater. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, we will improve our percentage of students with 90% or greater attendance by at least 3 percentage points. We will accomplish this by creating and implementing systems to improve attendance. Attendance will be tracked on a weekly basis using the Aggregate Student Attendance Report (RRSA) in the Automate The Schools (ATS) system. 2  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  SYSTEMS OR STRUCTURES NEEDED TO CREATE A SUPPORTIVE ENVIRONMENT FOUNDATION 1. Attendance committee will implement new systems to improve school-wide attendance. PS/MS 161 will maintain an attendance committee that will include Guidance staff, Teachers, and Parents. This attendance committee will create and implement systems to encourage higher class attendance, such as weekly recognition of the class in each academy with the best attendance, monthly certificates for students with perfect attendance, and parental recognition awards. Greater incentives will also be put in place around days with historically low attendance, such as the days before vacations and the last week of the school year. The attendance committee will conduct bi-weekly tracking of attendance trends and at-risk students. 2. Implement new School Wide Positive Behavior Intervention System (PBIS) policies and procedure in order to motivate student attitudes towards school and work. 3. Motivational language- positive discussions will be routinely had with students reminding them of their successes, “Glows”, in order to emphasize the importance of school and high achievement. Students will also be reminded of their needs of improvement upon their “Grows”. Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) 1. Implementors: Guidance Department, Selected Teachers, Selected Parents. Supervisors: Administrators 2. Implementors: PBIS Team comprised of Middle School Administrator, Dean of Discipline, Lead Teachers, 2.Ongoing, commencing in Sept through June Student council Supervisors: 1. Students, parents and teachers. 1.Weekly from Sept 2018 to June 2019 2.All teachers, students, parents and guardians 3  4. Instill the mindset of school importance, school responsibility, and achieving high grades as a foundational understanding of setting high expectations and goals. 3.School wide Middle School Administrator 3.All Year 3. Implementors: All Staff 4.School wide Supervisors: Administrators 4.Sept.-June 4. Implementors: All Staff 5. Monthly Character and Theme Implementation-monthly in class discussion and modeling of ethical and desired behaviors are implemented through a rotational development process. 6. Homework-Given on a daily basis to practice skills learned in class aligned to the CCLS. Homework is assigned as a way to foster independence as well as to develop student stamina. There is a focus on the quality of the homework rather than the quantity as we want our students to demonstrate deep understanding of the concepts covered in class. 5.School wide A. Holiday Homework Packets (K-5) 6.School wide 6.Sept- 5.Sept- June June Supervisors: Administrators 5. Implementors: All Staff Supervisors: Administrators 6.Implementors: Classroom Teachers, Specialists Supervisors: Administators 6A.Sept, Nov, Dec, Feb, April 6A. Implementors: Classroom Teachers, Specialists Supervisors: Elementary AP Teachers meet as a grade team to develop and assign homework for all the subjects. Homework is collected and graded. This work is then analyzed and used to drive instruction and small group work. Students are recognized for their efforts in the classroom and by getting positive phone calls home. B. Holiday Homework Packets (6-8)  Assignment: Teachers collaborate to compile a document that has all the assignments outlined for students to complete during a given holiday. This document allows students to have access to all of their responsibilities in one place. It is handed out days before going on break to assure that all students have access to the homework and are aware of what is expected of them. Parents are informed that this document is given prior to a break.  Homework completion is recorded for each student within each subject. Homework completion data is analyzed by administrators and teachers. Students 6A. K-5 Teachers 4  who complete all HW are celebrated as "Responsible Students". POSITIVE BEHAVIOR REINFORCEMENT 1.Honor Roll, Student of the Month, Student of the Week- programs designed to recognize and acknowledge those students providing exceptional effort and dedication. Designed to instill pride and respect for academic diligence. 2.Weekly Academy Newsletters- to inform and highlight instructional expectations, review upcoming activities, recognize achievements and increase communications, both vertically and horizontally through the hierarchical organization. 3.Middle School Town Hall Meetings-held monthly in the auditorium to discuss and present concepts, events, and expectations by the MS Dean and Assistant Principal. 4.Anti Bullying Festival is conducted twice yearly to create a school wide tone of congeniality and acceptance. Games, discussion, and understanding of the non-negotiable attitude of “we do not accept bullying under any circumstances”. 5.Recognition for Positive Behavior Blue Sheets; the program designed to recognize and reward positive behaviors and to acknowledge those in present time frames. Accumulated and comprehensive rewards for continual responses. 6B. 6-8 Teachers 1. All Grades 2.Academy centered 3.Grades 6-8 6B. Implementors: Classroom Teachers, Specialists Supervisor: Middle School AP 1. Implementors: Classroom Teachers, Guidance Counselors, Dean of Development 6B.Sept, Nov, Dec, Feb, April 1.Year end, monthly, weekly Supervisors: Administrators 2. Sept.-June 2. Implementors: Assistant Principals Supervisor: Principal 5  STRATEGIES TO ADDRESS SWDs, ELLS, HIGH NEED STUDENT GROUPS 1. Differentiated Homework Homework is assigned in a way that meets students’ current needs. Teachers take time to create homework that is scaffolded and takes into account the students’ learning styles. 4.All Grades 5. Grades 3-8 1. Targeted subpopulations (ELLs, SWDs) 1. Throughout the school year 3. Monthly 3. Implementors: Middle School AP, Dean of Discipline, Guidance Counselors, Teachers Supervisor: Middle School AP 4.Oct. and Feb. 5.Daily and Monthly award ceremonies 4. Implementors: Administrators, PBIS Team, Guidance Counselors Supervisors: Administrators 5. Implementors: Classroom teachers Supervisors: Middle School AP 1. Implementors: Teachers and Specialists Supervisors: Administrators 6 2.Late Sept. to June 2. Implementors: AP for Special Education, Guidance Counselor, SBST, Special Ed. Liaison 3.Early Oct-June Supervisor: Special Ed. Liaison 3.MS school students with high academic motivation 4.Screened students in need of outside mental health support 4.Five days per week 5. Sept. - June 2.School Implementation Team- Team addresses the needs of our SWD students by discussing the proper placement of individual students and the behavior supports they require. 2.Targeted individual students 3.HEAF and YES dedicate to filtered high performing selection of students focusing on high school and college preparation. Discussions based on Socratic techniques develop higher order thinking practices. 4. Northside Child Development Center-mental health advisory support system 5. PLAN B- hygiene awareness for middle school students, sex education, life habits and emotional and mental well being. 5. All middle school students TRUST 3. Implementor: Dean of Development Supervisor: Principal 4. Implementors: Outside Agency Supervisor: Principal 5. Implementor: Outside Agency Supervisor: Middle School AP 1.Mid -Year Staff Retreats for reflection on practices, data, and goal attainment, including student attendance data. Re-examination of shared expectations regarding student achievement, culture, community building and respect. 1.School community 1.Late January 1. Implementor: Administrators 7  2.Teacher Surveys as a valued tool and reflection on practices and interpretation of value added and course corrections needed and new challenges developed. 2.School wide 2.Three Times per year Supervisor: Principal 2. Implementor: Data Specialist and Staff Supervisor: Administrators 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. 1.Monthly Parent Newsletter- created to disseminate upcoming events, success stories, ongoing programs to connect the school and home community. (Parent Coordinator) 2. PS/MS 161.org Website is informational source for all resources relating to school programs, calendars, forms, surveys, links, and celebrations of ongoing structures and events at DPAC. (Technology Team) 3. Parent School Interaction Log is a web based resource tool to track and record school-to-home interactions, concerning positive and behavioral or academic concerns. (Teachers and Administrators) 4. Weekend day trips, Pot Luck Dinner for parents and students designed to increase the home-school connection and involvement of the adults engaged in the child’s development. (Administrators, PTA, and Teachers) Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. ● Principal ● Assistant Principal ● Deans ● Guidance Counselors ● Parent Coordinator 8  ● School Leadership Team ● PTA ● Teachers ● Outside Consultants; Generation Ready, Southern Cross Consultants, Teachers College at Columbia University ● Parent Involvement ● School Leadership Team ● Local Police Precinct-26th ● Northside Child Development Center ● Common planning periods, co teaching periods, grade level meetings, Coherency Group Meetings, ● Student handbooks, google document system ● Web Access ● NYCDOE school wide survey results and analysis Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E X Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2018, at least 70% of students will have an attendance rate of 90% or better, with an expectation that this will ensure an end of year percentage that meets the school's target. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Progress will be measured using student attendance rates from the RRSA report in ATS. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 9  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. During the 2017 Quality Review, PS/MS 161 was rated “Proficient” in the area of teacher collaboration (4.2) with the reviewer finding that "The majority of Teachers are engaged in structured, inquiry-based teams that promote achievement of school goals and implementation of the Common Core Learning Standards." On the 2018 NYC School Survey, the school scored a 2.98 on questions related to Collaborative Teachers. The school's strongest area according to the Survey was Cultural Awareness and Inclusive Classroom Instruction, scoring 1% above the City average. The school's weakest area was Innovation and Collective Responsibility, scoring 10% below the City average. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, all teachers will consistently implement the Schoolwide PBIS, which will be reflected by a 10% increase in teachers' average Measure of Teachers Practice (MOTP) ratings in Danielson Framework component 2d (Managing Student Behavior). 0  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff)  Evidence-based instructional programs,  professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Research-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change 1. PBIS Team & PBIS Initiative: The PBIS team, with representatives from classroom teachers, guidance, administration, and specialists, meets weekly to discuss and help implement structures needed at our school to improve student behavior. The team works to implement school policies that focus on Positive Behavioral Interventions and Supports. This includes ways to standardize school-wide expectations, recognize students that exhibit desired behaviors and support students that need reinforcement on school expectations. The team provides PD for school staff as well as lesson plans and suggestions on how teachers can work with students in need of support. During the 2017-18 school year, the PBIS Team rolled out a new school-wide PBIS. During the 2018-19 school year, the expanded PBIS Team will expand the initiative to further address behavioral needs. In September, the PBIS Team will lead professional learning for all staff on school-wide behavior matrices that standardize expectations for student behavior in all school settings (i.e. classroom, hallway, yard, etc.). The PBIS team will also provide all teachers with positive behavior lesson plans to be used throughout the year. Throughout the rest of the year, the PBIS team will continue to unveil new components of the PBIS Initiative. 2. At times embedded in the schedule, all Teachers will meet with their grade level (K-5) or content-area (6-8) teams to reflect, discuss, and analyze student data in order 1. All staff 1. Sept 2018-June 2019 1. PBIS Team 1  to improve student performance. The cycle work promotes accelerating student learning and effective teacher practices to support learning outcomes. All teacher team cycle work is recorded in Google documents, allowing teachers, coaches and administrators to communicate with one another about the work achieved each week. This allows the professional learning to expand beyond the scheduled time that members meet each week. Google documents also play a key role in the reflection aspect of the cycle. Teachers, instructional coaches, staff developers and administrators are able to easily access the work the team has done so far, connecting sessions of work in a tangible way. 3.Planning periods and meetings are built into the administrative prep schedule. These meetings include but are not limited to: meetings with the technology coach, coach-led math, ELA, content area, grade level and Special Education meetings, music and arts meetings, co-teacher planning meetings, ELA team meetings, Math team meetings, Content Area team meetings, Arts Team meetings as well as others. Giving teachers a time and space for their collaboration is essential to the growth of the middle school community and teacher’s professional practices. Content of these meetings revolves around creating a variety of formative and summative assessments teachers can implement in their classrooms to determine student growth in specific standards. Tools for Reflection and Goal Setting: 4. Several protocols are used for staff developers to be connected to the professional learning that is already happening in the building. Developers work alongside teachers to create varied assessments, model the implementation of formative and summative assessment in classroom lab sites and analyze student data in order to align TCRWP units of study to both the learning and instructional gaps of the students and teachers in regards to the Common Core Learning Standards. The staff developers use Google documents to post agendas, minutes and resources they plan to use in their sessions. This allows for constant and up to date communication between the developer, the literacy coach and the teachers in each of the needs-based groups. Any and all resources the developer uses are posted in a shared Google folder for all to pull from whenever they need to. The minutes posted in the Google documents serve as a resource for reflection after the development as well as between sessions. At the 2. All teachers, specialists, coaches, paraprofessional 2.Sept 2018- June 2019 Meeting once/week through the year 3.Sept 2018- June 2019 Meeting once/week through the year 3. All Teachers and Coaches 2.Teachers and administration 3.Teachers, Coaches and Administration 2  end of each professional development session, members of administration, the literacy coaches and the staff developers review the minutes from each of the sessions that occurred that day and create next steps based on what was accomplished and each group’s individual needs. These next steps are result-oriented with both tangible and pedagogical driven outcomes. Because reflection is a vital aspect of professional learning at 161, teachers also fill out a reflection form post-cycle of work with the developer. Teachers are asked to comment on what aspects of the cycle were helpful, how the newly learned skills can be seen in their instruction and how this will impact their students’ learning in the classroom. The literacy coach and staff developer use these reflection forms to determine next steps for the following cycle. The role of sustained change is evident as the teacher is given the time of a full cycle to learn, see modeled versions, practice and reflect on the new skills and strategies learned. Ultimately, teachers are building their repertoire of skills in reading and writing workshop through the process. 5. We have a robust Google Drive Folder system where teachers collaborate on lessons, professional development, and collecting resources. Our school website, PSMS161.org, features student projects, useful resources, and also serves as our portal to the school’s Google Drive File Sharing. As a result of this work, students are now regularly using Google Docs and sharing work with their teachers. Staff notes and agendas are all created and stored in Google Drive. Administrators, coaches, and staff are able to quickly locate agendas and review or comment on the work created. 6. Math teachers work with Generation Ready consultant once a month to analyze data and plan instruction. This work is continued through cycles built into the grade level professional learning team. During these cycles, teachers will focus on analyzing data to inform differentiated small group instruction based on learning and instructional gaps. 4. Staff Developers, Teachers, Coaches 4. October 2018-June 2019; Through a series of sessions 5.Sept 2018- June 2019 4.Coaches, Administration 3  5. Teachers, Student 6.Middle School Math Teachers 6 . 7-8 Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). 1. All teachers, specialists and paraprofessionals Data Analysis: 1. During the September Staff Development Day, the Data specialist, Instructional Coaches, and Administration will facilitate a data training using both last year’s and data collected in the fall to connect student outcomes to specific standards in order to target certain skills in future units. whole-day sessions throughout the year 1. Sept 2018 2. All teachers, specialists and paraprofessionals 2. Throughout 5.Teachers, Coaches, Administrators 6.Math Coach 1.Administrators, coaches, data specialist 4  2. PS/MS 161’s Data Specialist is tasked with compiling and organizing student data from a variety of sources, analyzing it to improve school processes, and communicating with teachers and administration. Data Specialist then works with teacher teams and instructional coaches to improve and standardize compilation of student data collected through ECAM counting and numeration assessments, TCRWP assessments, and other classroom assessments. Finally, he assists teachers in the analysis of student data and informs them about sources of data and ways it can inform instructional practice. 3. During the November 7th Staff Development Day, teachers will link data analysis around the subgroups in their classes to planning for upcoming units of study focusing on the role of formative and summative assessments as well as data driven modifications to provide access points for all learners to grasp the common core state standards within each unit being planned. Structures for Collaboration: 4.Students who speak English as a new language is an overarching population our school. These students make up 27% of our school population. Most ENL students in Kindergarten through Eighth grade are contained in classes by grade level. These students receive instruction from two teachers, one of whom is a content area teacher and the second teacher is one whom specializes in teaching ENL students. This set up allows for more targeted instruction. While all ENL classes are comprised of ELLs at a variety of levels, the teachers are modifying the lessons in a very distinct way. Now, teachers are able to differentiate on a deeper level as their instruction and population is more focused to begin with. This structure is also more conducive to a more equitable co-teaching environment. Two teachers share a classroom and the responsibilities that are attached to creating a rich learning environment for students. As both teachers feel empowered to take ownership over this environment, students now have more than one type of instructor, granting students more chances to enter the curriculum in a more meaningful way and teachers to collaborate constantly. 3. All teachers, specialists and paraprofessionals 4. All ENL teachers the school year 2.All teachers, coaches, data specialist 3. 1.Administrators, coaches, data specialists 4. Administrators and coaches 3. 11/6/18 4. Throughout the school year 5.Throughout 5  5. Weekly Special Education administrative meetings are built into teacher schedules, allowing for discussion around strategies for subgroups and other data analysis. Teachers analyze IEPs and other student data to make decisions in regards to specific modifications in units in order to provide entry points to different subgroups in their classrooms. 6.Weekly Co-Teacher meetings are built into teacher schedules to foster optimal communication between ENL and ICT co-teachers. During these meetings teachers plan instruction, differentiation, look at student work, assess and organize data to learn professionally together. 5. All Special Ed. Teachers the school year 6.Throughout the school year 5.Administrators and coaches 6. All ENL teachers, ICT teachers 1.All Teachers, Paraprofessionals, Specialists, RTI , Coaches, Administration 1. Ongoing living system of documents 2. All Teachers, Paraprofessionals, Specialists, RTI 2.September-June 3.Teachers (emphasis on teachers with TIP and new teachers) 3. Post 1-2 month cycle Activities that address the Capacity Framework element of Trust Shared Goal to Improve Student Outcomes 1.All members of the school community have access to all google documents connected to professional learning. Inside these documents are agendas, pacing calendars for professional learning, minutes from meetings as well as all tangible products created. All reflection and work is transparent allowing goals to be coherent for all. A Culture of Respect in the Professional Learning Community 2.Teacher teams begin all cycles of work by setting norms and roles for their meetings. Both the norms and roles stem from a collective responsibility approach, allowing for all members of the team to feel valuable as teams embark on their professional learning. These norms and roles are 6.Administrators and coaches 1.Administration 2.Teacher Teams 3.Administration 6 constantly reflected upon and revised as teams assess their progress towards specific goals. 3. At the conclusion of coach-led cycle of work, teachers take part in a reflective conversation with both their administration and the coach they worked with. This allows for complete transparency when reflecting about whether goals were met as well as next steps for the teacher as they continue post-cycle independently. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Communication 1.Parents and other members of the community are able to access the school website which provides information regarding professional development teachers experience, the school calendar with partnerships listed as well as resources created by teachers during their professional learning time. (Administrators and Technology Team) Initiatives and Events 2. Literacy-based parent workshops are held in the school building to communicate strategies and tools parents can use with their child at home. Coaches and teachers use their professional learning tangible products as resources during these workshops. (Administrators and Literacy Coach) 3. Parents and their children are invited into the building for Math Game Night. During this time coaches and teachers share new strategies, techniques and engagement tools to motivate students in learning math. (Administrators and Math Coach) Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Scheduling & Programming : Mondays 2:20-3:40, Tuesdays 2:20-3:35, Grade Level Team Meetings, Middle School Department based meetings, Special Education meetings, Coherency Team meetings, Professional Development Committee meetings, mid-year retreat, June retreat, Election Day Professional Development, Brooklyn-Queens Day, weekly co-teacher meetings, Cycles of Work : Job-embedded, coordinated by instructional coaches; evaluated by Admin, Cycle Reflection Form 7  Staff Developers : Teachers’ College ( Literacy K-8), Generation Ready (Math, 6-8), Southern Cross Consultancy ( Math, K-5), Collaboration Tools: School Website, Google Drive Shared Folder System, LASW, Google Apps For Education, ECAM, State Assessment Data, TC WRP Assessments, NYSESLAT Assessments. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E X Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, each teacher will have been observed two times. The average teacher rating for Danielson component 2d will have improved by 5%. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Progress will be monitored by looking at Teachers MOTP ratings. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 8  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. In the January 2017 Quality Review, the school was rated proficient in Allocating Resources (1.3), Goals (3.1), and Evaluating School Decisions (5.1). On the 2018 NYC School Survey, PS/MS 161 scored a 3.55 on questions related to Effective School Leadership. The school scored above the City average in the sub-categories of Inclusive Leadership (5% above) and Instructional Leadership (2% above). According the Survey, the greatest area of need for the school was the category of Teacher Influence, in which PS/MS 161 scored 7% below the City average. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, as a result of school leaders providing all teachers with increased leadership opportunities, there will be a 7% increase in teachers' positive responses to questions and prompts related to teacher influence, as measured by the 2019 NYC School Survey, compared to the teachers' responses to similar questions and prompts from the 2018 NYC School Survey. 9  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs,  professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). 1. Increasing Opportunities for Teacher Leadership In Their Learning and Professional Development: 1A.All teachers, specialists and paraprofessionals 1. Strategic and Recurring Time to Meet & Plan: Giving teachers a time and space for their collaboration is essential to the growth of the school community and teacher’s professional practices. In PS/MS 161, common planning periods and meetings are built into the schedule. These meetings include but are not limited to: grade meetings, department meetings, Special Education meetings, co-teacher planning meetings and Teacher Team meetings. During our collaborative planning sessions we are looking at students and discussing how students learn best. Lessons that teachers create integrate specific practices for students with disabilities, for example, visuals, recordings, technology and project-based learning. 2. Teacher Teams: Teacher teams are based on collaborative inquiry work supporting standards for student achievement and school improvement goals. In PS/MS 161, we believe that teachers know what they need and what’s best for their students. Teacher learning focuses on daily teaching and is designed to support teachers’ instructional pedagogical practices for the ultimate goal of improvement of student learning (Teacher Leadership). 1B.All teachers, specialists and paraprofessionals 3. Co-Teaching Meetings: Teachers show leadership during co-teaching meetings. During this time, teachers assess their own instruction by spending time analyzing students’ performance in the classroom and create action plans in order to effectively address students’ needs. Additionally, it is a time for both teachers to discuss and develop a system that will work for both in terms of Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) 1A.Teachers and administration 1B.Teachers and Administration 1A.Once a week throughout the school year 1B.Once a week throughout the school year 1C.Teachers and administration 1C. Once a 0  expectations, grading, behavior management and overall philosophy of teaching. 4. Staff Developers and In-House Professional 1C. Co-teachers Development: Through more than 20 whole-school day literacy and mathematics sessions, teachers work in the school building with instructional coaches and staff developers in groups, collaborating professionally. All professional learning that takes place with the staff developers begins with teacher-led goal setting sessions to establish coherence as teachers make their way through chosen cycles of work. These goals are then connected to job-embedded professional development, resulting in teachers using strategies learned in these sessions in their day-to-day lessons. 5. Outside Professional Development: Through more than 20 whole-day workshops, teachers are given the opportunity to choose the workshop that best fits their needs. Teachers are always encouraged to apply to other professional development opportunities that the NYC DOE or other organization have to offer. 2. Increasing Opportunities for Shared Decision Making: 1. Hiring Process: Members of the school community will be participating in the design of a rubric that will be used by members of the hiring committee during hiring season. This rubric will include teacher’s common beliefs as well as the expectations that need to be met by the candidates. Additionally, teachers will craft a list of questions that members of the hiring committee will be expected to use during interviews and hiring fairs. 2. Usage of School Funds: Through surveys, teachers inform the administration of the needs in their classrooms. In teams, teachers then prioritize needs and agree on the allocation of designated funding. 3. Selection of Instructional Materials in the Classroom: In PS/MS 161, teachers build their own curriculums using a variety of resources. These resources include: Common Core Learning Standards, EngageNY, DOE Approved Curriculums, and other supplementary programs and software. 4. Distributive Leadership: In PS/MS 161, structures have been created to provide stakeholders with opportunities to participate in the decision making process in our building. Teams and or Committees include: School Leadership Team, Professional Development Committee, School Implementation 1D. Teachers, instructional coaches, staff developers 1E. Teachers week throughout the school year 1D. Three literacy cycles, three sessions each; four math cycles, three sessions each; and four planning sessions 1E. As per requested 2A. Once a month 1D. Teachers, instructional coaches, administration 1E. Instructional coaches, administration 2A. Teachers and administration 2A. Teacher (representative from each academy 2B. Nov, Feb, and May 1  Team, MOSL Committee, Coherency Team and Parent Association. 2C. Oct. and May 2B. Administration 3. Providing Opportunities for Feedback: A.Observations: Members of the administration conduct at least four cycles of observations using Danielson’s Framework, engaging teachers in professional feedback conversations that improve teacher practice. During observations, members of the administration focus on recording evidence of activities and assignments that promote and ask students to explain their thinking; evidence that students understand the instructional outcome and learning activities, and evidence of students intellectually engaged throughout the lesson. In post-observation conferences, observers make sure feedback is actionable and meaningful by including a rationale/purpose, a strategy with an appropriate example, the needed resources and a specific time frame. B.Formative Feedback: In PS/MS 161, members of the administration invest time in providing ongoing and timely support to teachers during the implementation of new tools, skills and strategies in their classrooms. This is evident in the school’s current Google documents. In PS/MS 161, all cycle work (teacher-coach, teacher team as well as department and co-teaching meetings) is recorded in Google documents. This allows teachers, coaches and administrators to communicate with one another about the work throughout the week, expanding professional learning beyond the few periods embedded in the schedule. Administrators take part of the learning discussion not to evaluate progress but to provide ongoing support designed to promote learning. Members of the administration have designated Mondays’ admin meetings to collaboratively review and provide feedback in all Google documents currently being used in the building. 2B. Teachers 2D. Teams meet at least once a month throughout the school year 3A. Minimum of four observations a year 3B. As needed 2C. Teachers 2D. Teachers 3A. All teachers 2C. Instructional Coaches and administration 2D. Teachers and administration 3A. Administration 2  3B. All teachers 3B. Instructional Coaches and Administration Addressing the Needs of Student Subgroups (Programming): 1. English Language Learners (ELLs): In our schedule, ENL students are contained together classrooms by grade level. These students receive instruction from two teachers, one of whom is a content area teacher and the second teacher specializes in teaching ELL students. This structure allows for more targeted instruction. Teachers are able to differentiate on a deeper level as their instruction and population is more focused to begin with. This structure is also more conducive to a more equitable co-teaching environment. Two teachers share a classroom and the responsibilities that are attached to creating a rich learning environment for students. As both teachers feel empowered to take ownership over this environment, students now have more than one type of instructor, granting students more chances to enter the curriculum in a more meaningful way. Trust: When teachers are provided with time, support, feedback and differentiated professional learning activities, they become accountable to each other. Coming together as a result of similar needs and goals and working toward 1. ELLs at all levels, ENL teachers, all grade levels 1. Throughout school year 1. Teachers and administration Teachers Throughout the year Teaching staff and members of the administration 3  common ends, fosters commitment to the group/team and builds trust, community and sense of purpose. When it comes to trust we focus on two aspects: “A shared goal to improve student outcomes” and “A culture of respect in the professional learning community.” Following are some of the activities that address the two focus areas mentioned above: 1. Shared Google Documents with instructional 2. 3. coaches and administration feedback to teachers IPC, Pre-Observation and Post-Observation Conferences Integrating Danielson’s Rubric in discussions and teacher practice. 4. PD Evaluations 5. Share-Outs after Cycles 6. Collaboratively Filling out the Coach Cycle Form 7. Independence in the 80-min Professional Learning Monday meetings 8. Coherence Team gives teachers a voice 9. Co-Teachers Meetings 10. Administrative Preps 11. Teachers’ Shout-Outs 12. Coaches bulletin boards highlighting best practice 13. Coaches Newsletters 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Improve practice leads to improved student outcomes; therefore, in PS/MS 161, teachers and administrators make sure that parents know that teachers are continually learning the best ways to teach their students. Some strategies and activities that ensure this process are: 1.Parent Teacher Conferences, but particularly September’s Curriculum Night. (teachers, administrators, and parent coordinator) 2.Parent Involvement Time (Tuesdays from 2:20 pm to 3:00 pm) (teachers and administrators) 3.Parent Workshops (instructional coaches, administrators, and parent coordinator) 4  4.Math Game Night (math instructional coach and parent coordinator) 5.Newsletters (teachers, parent coordinator) Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Scheduling & Programming: Common planning periods, co-teaching periods, department meetings. Coordinated and implemented by instructional coaches and members of the administration Cycles of Work: job-embedded. Coordinated by Instructional Coaches; evaluated by Admin Staff Developers: Literacy K-8, Generation Ready (Math, 6-8), Southern Cross (Math, K-5) Talent Coach (PD for admin and coaches, calibration meetings) Mondays’ 2:20 pm to 3:40 pm Tuesdays’ 2:20 pm to 3:00 pm Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E X Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. In January 2019, the school will survey teachers using questions similar to the ones contained in the NYC School Survey. The percentage of positive responses on questions and prompts related to teacher influence will be 77% or greater. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Progress will be monitored by evaluating the results of teacher survey questions that are based on the NYC School Survey. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 5  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. PS/MS 161 was evaluated as “Well Developed” in the area of high expectations during its January 2017 Quality Review. On the 2018 School Survey, in the area of Strong Family-Community Ties, PS/MS 161 scored a 3.55, increasing from 3.04 in the prior year. The school performed above the citywide average in both the area of Outreach to Parents and Parent Involvement in School. Only 29% of parents completed the Survey, reflecting a need for greater participation from parents in the school community. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, PS/MS 161 will have increased its percentage of parent responses to the NYC School Survey by 50%, from 29% to 44% of parents. 6  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs,  professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Research-Based Programs, Professional Development, Systems and Structures 1a. K-8 1a. Fall 2018- Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) 1a. Parent Coordinator, Administration, Teachers. 1b. Parents, Parent Coordinator, Administration, Teachers 1c. Parents, Parent Coordinator, Administration, Teachers Spring 2019 1b.Fall 2018- Spring 2019 1c. Fall 2018- Spring 2019 1b. K-8 1c. K-8 1d. K-8 1. Active Parent Coordination: a.Accessible to and assist parents with issues and concerns related to their child and/or the school. b. Establish and maintain a welcoming environment for all parents. c. Build a positive working relationship with the members of school community, including the principal, parents, teachers and children. d. Ensure that the school has an active, functioning Parent Association/Parent-Teacher Association that contributes to the school by lending support as needed. 1d. Fall 2018- Spring 2019 1d. Parents, Parent Coordinator, Administration 1e. K-8 1f. K-8 1e. Teachers, Administration 1f.Parents, Teachers 1e. Fall 2018- Spring 2019, with a particular focus on Tuesdays 1f. Fall 2018- Spring 2019, with a particular focus on Tuesdays 7  2. K-8 2. Tuesdays: Once a week 2. Teachers, Administration e. Develop and implement effective parent outreach strategies by using the teacher-parent interaction log to inform parents about student performance and school activities, and to reinforce positive behavior and academic achievement. f. Assist parents in knowing how to support their child’s learning through communications documented in the teacher-parent interaction log and set up meetings to help understand the content students are learning. 2. Tuesday’s Parent Involvement & Engagement Time: Tuesdays’ parental time offers parents the opportunity to meet with K-8 teachers about their child’s progress as well as teachers informing parents of pertinent strategies to support past and current units in all subject areas. Teachers also address Common Core Learning Expectations by distributing to parents benchmark grade level Common Core expectations, tailored homework based on student need for meeting periodic and end-of the year benchmarks. Every Tuesday from 2:30pm to 3:00pm, teachers: 1. Arrange meetings to inform parents about their child’s overall progress. This type of meeting helps parents and teachers identify academic and behavior patterns across all content areas and 8  together brainstorm possible solutions to increase child’s engagement 2. Call specific parents to inform them of their child’s weekly academic and/or behavior progress. 3. Receive parents who informally request a meeting to briefly provide information regarding student progress 4. Log calls and/or meetings in the Parent-School Interaction Log; a Google document where all members of the school community enter information regarding their efforts on parent outreach. 5. Meet in teams to create newsletters and/or packets with letters to parents informing them of the expectations for units of study and/or assigned homework. 3. Parent Workshops: Parent Workshops at P.S. 161 are organized by the parent coordinator, and are facilitated by the Literacy and Mathematics Coach. Parental workshops focus on understanding the Literacy & Mathematics Development of Students, periodic and end of the year Common Core Standards, and specific reading, writing, and mathematical strategies to support students at home. Parents are given handouts (i.e benchmark reading levels, Tips for parents on each grade level) for parent education and review. Parent workshops will continue throughout the school-year promoting engagement and education 4. Active PTA: Active members that continuously help the school become a safe and positive environment. PTA members recruit parent volunteers that serve in various capacities around the school such as: 1. The School Leadership Team 2. Lunchroom duties 3. Classroom assistants 4. Family Trip Coordinators 3. Three times a year 3. K-8 Parents 3.Parent 4. K-8 Parents 4. Fall 2018/ Coordinator, Mathematics and Literacy Coaches Spring 2019 4. PTA Members 9  5. Community-Based Organization (CBO) Involvement: PS/MS 161 will engage with a variety of CBOs that increase student exposure to career opportunities. Parents and family members are invited to student arts performances conducted through relationships with CCNY (drama) and Lucy Moses (musical instruments). 5. Parents of arts-inclined students 5.Throughout the schoolyear Strategies to address needs of subgroups 1. Parent Workshops Targeting Parents of Student Sub-Groups (ELLs & SWDs): Parent Coordinator along with the administration, instructional coach and teachers will host several orientation sessions for the parents of ELLs and SWDs. Monthly calendars, posters, fliers and phone blasts in both English and Spanish will be utilize to inform parents of these activities. Some of the topics include:  How to Help My ELL Child at Home  Using Technology to Improve Language Skills  Addressing the Needs of the Struggling Readers  Understanding the NYC High School Application Process- Where can my child apply?  Read Aloud Night  Math Game Night 2. Adult Classes: In addition, our technology coach and middle school technology teacher will host monthly workshops for parents that will focus on improving parents' technology skills. Additionally, parents of ELLs will be invited to weekly attend Rosetta Stone workshops held on Tuesdays from 2:20 pm to 3:30 pm. Each parent will receive a username and a password that they can use in the school's computer lab. 1. Parent Coordinator,parents, admin, instructional coaches 1. Fall 2018- Spring 2019 2.Spring 2019 2. Parent Coordinator, parents, admin, instructional coaches 5. Arts coordintor 1.Administrative Team Instructional Coaches 2. Technology Coach, Instructional Coaches 0  3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. 1. Training Parent Leaders: The Parent Coordinator trains and empowers parents to become effective advocates for children. (Parent Coordinator) 2. Recruiting Parent Volunteers: Parents are encouraged to participate and help in the coordination of activities taking place in the school building. Parent Volunteers work as hall monitors, lunch aides, classroom library helpers, and as classroom parents, among others. Parents will also be recognized each month for recruiting additional parent volunteers. (Parent Coordinator) 3. Develop Shared Goal to Improve Student Outcomes 1. Curriculum Night 2. At-Risk Letters 3. Parent Workshops on the CCLS and instructional shifts 4. Engage NY PDs 5. After School Student Selection Process (Parent Coordinator, parents, admin, instructional coaches) 4. Develop A Culture of Respect in the Community 1. School Website 2. Parent Calendar 3. Parent Newsletters 4. Advertisement for Tuesday Parent Time 5. Phone Call Log 6. Parent Involvement in Debate and other special programs (Parent Coordinator, parents, admin, instructional coaches) Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Resources needed: Human resources: Parent Coordinator 1  Instructional Coaches Parent Monitors and Classroom Parent Assistants Classroom Teachers K-8, Parent-Days Tuesdays Instructional Resources Common Core Parent Guides & Expectations for Each Grade (Engage.org) Teachers College Resources, TC Benchmark Levels Grades K-8 Print Strategies and Bands of Reading-K-8 Paper-For Parent Newsletters and Handouts High-School Application Process Sheets Computers for Working with Parents Mathematics Instructional Guided Mathematics Game Manipulatives Schedule Adjustments  Parent Workshops take place prior and after school hours Parent Days, Tuesdays are from 2:20-3:00 Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February of 2018, parent-teacher conference attendance will be at least 10% greater than at the same time the previous year. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Parent-Teacher attendance will be tracked by the school's Assistant Principals and Data Specialist using attendance sheets collected at each session. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) During the school day: Tier I intervention within the classroom in 30 minute intervals. K-8 Tier II intervention follows pull-out model in 30 minute intervals. K-8 RTI Afterschool After-School: Targeted students receive extra support during after-school hours. Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) · Small group and/or one to one instruction, identified by TC running records -Strategy reading and guided reading groups based on print strategies and bands of reading · Tier 2: Small Group Instruction · Fountas & Pinnell, Leveled Literacy Intervention (LLI) · Performance Task Writing Assessment, Argument Based Writing Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Students scoring level 1 or 2 on NY stateELAassessments. Tier 1 Instruction by Classroom Teacher: 1-8 students reading below one benchmark in reading Tier 2: Pull-Out Instruction-Small -Students not meeting Tier 1 Instruction -Students Reading Below one-to-two levels in reading Tier 3: Pull-Out Instruction- Students who did not meet Reading Benchmark in Tier 2 Work Students are chosen Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Benchmark TC running record (Fall-MOSL) assessments to identify at- risk students. ELA Balanced Literacy Instructional Support: Progress monitoring for comprehension, vocabulary, fluency etc. Guided reading, · Shared reading · Interactive reading and writing · Oral language development · Higher order thinking skills aligned to CCLS. · Questioning and discussion techniques · ENL strategies if appropriate 3  Mathematics based on the DOE pre-set below grade level scale score required for referral of student to RTI services Students scoring level 1 or 2 on NY state Math assessments. Not meeting Common Core Grade Level 3 Work Science Students scoring level 1 or 2 on NY state Science assessments. Tier 1 Instruction by Classroom Teacher: 1-8 students reading Tier I intervention is implemented in grades K-8 in order to address student needs regarding 4 · Words Their Way/ Word Work Reading Comprehension Strategies Number Talks · Weekly guided math groups in order to target individual students’ needs and as based on analysis of student math data. Math games to boostautomaticityin basic math facts and to help increase overall mathematical computation and understanding. · ST MATH Program · Higher order thinking skills aligned to CCLS. · Questioning and discussion techniques · ENL strategies if appropriate · Investigations Curriculum Cognitive Guided Instruction · guided reading, · shared reading · Small group and individualized student instructional activities and assessments, tiered at a variety of instructional levels · Tier One and Tier Two intervention within the classroom Morning school groups: Targeted students receive extra support on building mathematical knowledge and skills · · Small group work is conducted to provide interventions to targeted students. During the school day: *Tier I and Tier II intervention within the classroom in 30 minute intervals.  below one benchmark in reading science vocabulary and science skills. Social Studies Tier 1 Instruction by Classroom Teacher: 1-8 students reading below one benchmark in reading, students achieving level 1 or 2 on in class Social Studies assessments. Content area reading and writing addresses students’ needs in building up their scientific literacy · interactive reading and writing · oral language development · higher order thinking skills aligned to CCLS. · Questioning and discussion techniques · ENL strategies if appropriate · Peer evaluation Integration of technology Guided reading, · Shared reading · Interactive reading and writing · Oral language development · Higher order thinking skills aligned to CCLS. · Questioning and discussion techniques · ENL strategies if appropriate Multi-media tools are used to help students analyze documents, Written materials are differentiated based on student reading levels. Learning to use scientific data bases to create graphics and work on analysis skills. · Tier I intervention is provided for students in grades K-8 in order to address student needs in social studies. · Small group work is conducted based on analysis of student data around comprehension, analysis, identification, and writing responses. · Written materials are differentiated based on student reading levels. During the school day: *Tier I and Tier II intervention within the classroom in 30 minute intervals. 5  texts, pictures, charts, and maps. Field Trips are arranged for students requiring more understanding and immersion in the social studies content Use of technology for research and incorporating music from the revolutionary, colonial and civil war periods into Social Studies presentations and digital work according to CCLS At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Identified by student reflection sheets and referral sheets given by teachers.r  During the day, After School  Counseling  Training for Peer Mediation  Health Boys/Girls  High School Applications *Provides services designed to help students with difficulty functioning at home and in the classroom, in areas of attendance, conflict resolution, initial referrals to special education evaluation, and to outside preventive agencies. *Provides suggestions in regards to progress monitoring and intervention strategies based on the identified academic and behavioral needs of the student. *Available to discuss with identified at-risk students’ relevant issues currently 6  impairing their academic success 7  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 40 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. PS/MS 161 will provide STH with shopping bags containing school uniforms, socks/underwear, backpacks, notebooks, pencils, and other school supplies. The school will make additional efforts to reach out to the guardians of STH to inform them about school events, parent workshops and additional ways for them to become part of the school community. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). n/a 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 8  n/a 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. n/a 9  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. We have a set of guiding principles we use when looking for a new teacher to work at 161. This person must be smart, passionate, able to work collaboratively, work hard and often times selflessly. The administrative cabinet has determined a critically important aspect to great instruction which is for the majority of our teachers to be highly qualified and to retain these teachers once they become highly effective. There are three strategies we use: we hire former student teachers that have been highly recommended by their cooperating teachers. Our co-operating teachers are highly qualified. The second strategy is we work very closely with, Teacher Staffing, Support Manager, in the Office of Teacher Recruitment & Quality, New York City Department of Education. We meet with her at the beginning and the end of the school year to advice of her which type of teachers we are looking for to complete the table of organization and from our first encounter she knows the caliber of teacher we want to work at 161 so she sends those types of candidates. The third method is the responsibility of the hiring committee to review all resumes and then ask prospective teachers to come in for an interview. During the interview we ask many questions about instruction, student and parent engagement, use of data, innate talents and how would hiring them could help to maintain excellence in instruction. Next, prospective teachers are asked to give a demo lesson. The hiring committee which usually consists of the administrative cabinet, a coach and the hiring committee chairperson debriefs with possible new hire to discuss the lesson seen. Then, after interview is concluded the committee discusses the strong points and how through coaching we could support the new teacher’s growth and develop her best practices. Finally based on a shared vision for our school, we will make a decision. Our retention rate of highly qualified teachers has improved over the last three years. Evidence gathered shows that most of our teachers leave because they relocate to other cities. In fact, only two out of the 5 teachers that we hired left to teach at another school. The others remain and moving from “Developing” to “Effective” in many components. Our new recruits stay with us because of an effective and innovative system we have in place to support growth through outside consultants or in- house professional development in literacy, mathematics, technology, and how to use data to drive instruction. New teachers receive the support of a mentor, several coaches, a grade leader, an assistant principal and the principal. The aforementioned staff sets up a schedule and a cycle of support for new teachers which includes meeting in grade teams, one-to-one meetings with a coach, after school workshops, and common planning time. These teachers receive consistent feedback based on the Danielson Framework, instructional expectations, established best practices, and the quality review rubric. We continue the support of the new teacher as the teacher grows and may not be considered a “new teacher’ any longer. We are very pleased with the professional development that is provided to all of our teachers because it is based on the Common Core, Danielson Framework, 0  teacher’s needs, interest and skill level. The culture of the school invokes trust and speaks of a school environment that is non-judgmental and where teachers can join in with other teachers to build camaraderie, strong teacher teams and future school leaders 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). Every year in June, teams of teachers reflect upon the current school year looking at what were our strengths and weaknesses. We discuss our instructional practices, new and old initiatives, review data, and the PBIS (behavior management system). We are looking to determine what we should keep, modify or eliminate altogether. We are looking to see what practices impacted student outcome; what practices helped to make our teachers highly qualified; and which initiatives impacted the school environment, culture and parent confidence. Our end-of-year reflection time helps the school meet the needs of our teaching staff. Our theory of action is if our teachers are smarter our students will be smarter. We begin the work of creating a professional development calendar that reflects the needs of our teachers, the needs of the school and the alignment of professional development to the Common Core, the Framework and the Quality Review rubric. The professional development calendar reflect activities on persuasive and argumentative essay writing, Cognitively Guided Instruction in math, analysis of data and data-driven instruction, use of Depth of Knowledge (DOK) levels in lesson planning, and Universal Design by Learning (UDL). Also some sessions are formatted based on the skill set of the teacher, for example content area teachers needs speak specifically to the subject they teach but new teachers needs are different so when planning these aspects must be taken into consideration. The work that is planned during the retreat is done by outside consultants, coaches, grade leaders, assistant principals and the principal. Teachers receive development in literacy, mathematics and technology which are then given in cycles and are based on needs determine by data such as State assessments, running records, teachers needs and surveys. Cycles of professional development are provided by coaches in literacy, mathematics, technology and/or behavior management. Inter Visitations are scheduled so teachers can visit each other to learn new and best practices and effective teachers provide professional development through turn key talks modeling of lessons. Principal provides professional development by video in-house or a workshop. The format used by coaches is to observe teachers teaching, sometimes teachers are video taped and afterward teacher and coach meet to discuss what was seen in lesson and feedback is provided and next steps determined. Professional Development is provided by outside consultants for all staff including administration. The district and the Field Support Center provides professional development for teachers, assistant principals and principal. The superintendent and the talent coach provide professional development for assistant principals and principals. The talent coach also works with instructional coaches. Paraprofessionals receive professional development on a variety of topics. The education of staff is extremely important to the efficacy of the school but parent engagement effects student outcome too. Therefore the parent coordinator plans monthly professional development for parents is important too. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program 1  Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). The school's incoming kindergarten students come from a wide variety of pre-K's, so our focus on acclimating students to the school is through activities targeted at parents and families. Parent and guardians are invited to come to a Meet and Greet, at this meeting teachers and administrators talk to the parents about the curriculum, the arts and the types of parent workshops scheduled for the school year that will help them to support their child’s academic and social growth. The parent coordinator speaks to parents explaining how he can assist with their concerns about their child’s education and how they can become an active member in the school community. School psychologist and guidance counselor and the assistant principal are available to meet with the parents to discuss the IEP, school’s expectations, the type of assistance that is available for the student. Our belief is that Special Education has tools designed to help each individual child to move beyond Special Education to a full inclusive schedule because Special Education is not a destination its a pathway to greater access to academia. 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. Teacher teams regularly analyze data to determine gaps, strengths, feedback, next steps and development of lesson plans that are aligned to a targeted outcome. Throughout this process, teachers identify assessments that can be used at class, grade, and school-wide level. The MOSL team is one of the groups that participates in the selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures for the school. The MOSL Committee is selected by staff, the UFT chairperson and the principal. The MOSL Committee members meet several times in September to discuss which assessments would be best for the school. These decisions are made based on the most current assessment data. This committee also takes into consideration the selections made the previous school year and evaluate if the decision met the needs of the students and teachers. Grade leaders and the coaches engage in professional discussions and support the decisions made by the MOSL Committee. Final decisions are made because of discussions, data, a quorum and principal input. The specific type of professional development provided for teachers encompasses the foundations of MOSL selection process and purpose of data driven instruction. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide 2  plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 615,672 150,829 29,518 10,217 6,052,275 X X X X X Column B Section Reference(s) Section 5B,5E Section 5A,5B,5C,5D Section 5A to 5E Section 5A to 5E Section 5A to 5E 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 3  2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 4  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. PS/MS 161, Don Pedro Albizu Campos , in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students PS/MS 161, Don Pedro Albizu Campos, will support parents and families of Title I students by: ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City and State standards and assessments; 5  ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community. Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability grade-level curriculum and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g.,ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, Progress Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in 6  the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Elementary and Secondary Act (ESSA); ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings, with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress. School-Parent Compact (SPC) PS/MS 161, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum 7  Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Elementary and Secondary (ESSA) Act. Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year. Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff 8  ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering will all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); 9  ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; III. Student Responsibilities Student Responsibilities: ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 0  Addendum: Community School Partnerships Directions: The Community School (CS) strategy is directly aligned to the Framework for Great Schools. Community Schools bring schools and community partners together and integrate academics, health, youth development, and family engagement to provide students with the tools and opportunities they need to succeed. The Core Services in Community Schools are Expanded Learning Time (ELT), Attendance Supports, Family Engagement, and Health & Wellness. Part 1 – Community School Partnerships Goal(s) How is the CS strategy integrated into academic instruction at your school, and what impact has it had on student academic outcomes? The strategy for the CS is to collaborate with academic staff and extended learning time staff to ensure there is continuity with the school curriculum and behavioral expectations. In addition, attendance and leadership development initiatives provided to students will positively impact the academic instruction and academic outcomes at the school. Indicate the summative goal(s) of the Community School for the 2018-19 school year. Be sure to construct the goal to be SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Realistic, and Time-bound. (1) For the 2018-2019 school year, overall attendance will increase by 1.5 percentage points and the number of chronically absent students will be reduced by 3 percentage points. (2) The number of parents completing the Learning Environment Survey will increase from 29% to 44% of parents. (3) Students will be actively engaged in expanded learning activities, which will be reflected by achieving an average daily attendance of 80% in expanded learning activities. Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Community School Annual Goal(s): How will achieving your Community School Goal(s)--in Expanded Learning Time (ELT), Attendance Supports, Family Engagement, and Health & Wellness--support your academic goals for students? It is therefore anticipated that achieving the proposed outcomes will further enhance and add value to 161’s overall mission. Additionally, the goals will independently and collectively help to address barriers that are currently interfering with student academic progress. Part 2 – Community School Partnerships Core Services Action Plan Part 2a. Identify the Community-based Organization (CBO) partnerships that you will develop in ELT, Attendance Supports, Family Engagement, and Health & Wellness, their target student population(s), and scope of the services provided. As well as supporting schools’ supportive environment and attendance work, CBOs should be helping to support your school’s instructional focus. CBO Partnership SASF / Attendance Team / Parent Coordinator Target Population chronically-absent students Scope of Service SY18-19 SMART Goal 161M Community School will implement school wide attendance initiatives including success Overall attendance will increase by 1.5 percentage points. 1  mentoring, individual and class incentives. Attendance campaign will be implemented for students and their families. The number of chronically absent students will be reduced by 3 percentage points. SASF / Parent Coordinator/ Principal / DOE staff / CBO Partners /PTA School-wide The number of parents completing the Learning Environment Survey will increase from 29% to 44% of parents. 161M Community Schools will implement the Success Mentor model. Success Mentors will be assigned cohort of students that have been identified as either at risk of becoming or currently chronically absent As part of a larger strategy, the Community School at 161M will engage in efforts to increase family engagement by offering classes and workshops, recruiting parents to join the CST, working closely with the parent coordinator and the PTA to support and and by engaging in ongoing communication. One measure of our impact will be to increase the number of parents that feel compelled to complete the Learning Environment Survey. SASF/ Aspira/ Scores/ Harlem Dowling and other school-funded ELT programs Up to 250 students 161M Community Schools will offer a comprehensive ELT program. Average daily attendance of 80% in expanded learning activities. 2 All ELT programming independently of funding source will share a common vision and coordinate  Part 3 – Budget and Resource Alignment to ensure a wide variety of activities while preventing redundancy. CSD will lead this effort. Part 3a. Indicate resources your Community Partnership will leverage to achieve your summative SMART goal(s) and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 161M Community Schools will want to use the budget to creatively address the 4 core service areas. Additionally, we will want support to ensure that we can effectively implement the Community Schools strategy of organizing all of the financial and human resources. At this time, school staff will be allocated to support with attendance initiatives within the success mentoring initiative, and the Parent coordinator and CSD are working in partnership to develop the family engagement action plans. 161 anticipates further integration of human and instructional resources to support the SMART goals of the CS. Part 3b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) X X Title I SWP Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside X 21st Century SIG Grant School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 3c. Describe how the school will partner with the Lead CBO to do the following: 1. Community Schools are expected to partner with a community-based partner organization (CBO) and together with members of the School Leadership Team, hire a Community School Director. The Director will lead implementation of the asset and needs assessment process, and other critically important coordinating activities. Indicate how you will leverage this aspect of the work. Community Schools are expected to personalize the needs of all students, through strategic programming and services, as determined by the asset and needs assessment, and must also offer Expanded Learning Time (ELT) and mental health programming. In completing this section, ensure that you think about how: (1) the right services are provided to the right students and families at the right time; and (2) how you will seamlessly coordinate services with instructional programming happening throughout and outside of the school day. Indicate how you will implement this work, and describe other programming you anticipate to be in place to strengthen this initiative. Community Schools are expected to emerge as Partnership Schools, which are places where parents and families feel welcome, actively participate in the conversation and decision-making around the renewal of their schools, and have many opportunities to advocate for their children. Monthly meetings and Community School Forums engaging families and community stakeholders will be a critical part of this family engagement strategy. Describe how you will implement this aspect of the work. Community School Principals are expected to meet on a weekly basis with their Community School Director, select Assistant Principals, key staff, and other CBOs, to analyze trends in data and case manage individual students. Data tools – including the New Visions Data Sorter - and training will be available for schools to use. Indicate how you will implement this aspect of the work. 2. 3. 4. 1) The Community School Director has conducted an asset and needs assessment and coordinates activities and tasks that have been identified as critical to the implementation of the Community Schools strategy at 161M. With 3  support from the Lead CBO, and school leadership the expectation will be shared with the entire school community. The Community School Director will lead the process involving key participants among teachers, staff, student and their families along with other CBO partners. The Community School Director will report back to the school community, sharing the results of the work. Additionally, the Community School Director will lead provider meetings with representation from CBO partners and school providers to establish the process for ensuring alignment, planning and monitoring impact. 2) 161M Community School will seek to ensure that all services, supports and opportunities are coordinated and connected regardless of the funding source or partner. It will fall upon the Community School Director with ongoing support from the school leadership and the lead CBO supervisor to develop the mechanisms for identifying which students are receiving services and by whom, where are the gaps and to work with the various providers and school support teams to ensure that students that are most in need of services are given priority. The Community School Director will also serve as the point person to ensure that current structures such as Student Intervention Teams and Attendance Meetings are streamlined and that information is shared about interventions and progress. It is the expectation that other CBO providers such as SASF, National Dance Institute, New York Urban Debate League, College Access for All, and SCORES Soccer and Poetry will participate in this effort. Theme specific provider meetings for ELT will be held to ensure collaboration, and coordination. 3) The Community School at 161M will host a community school event during the Fall that will allow us to introduce the concept to the entire school community. The event will also be an opportunity to conduct the asset and needs assessment. Parents will be actively recruited to be part of formal structures such as the Community Schools Team Meeting. They will also be actively recruited to attend the classes and workshops during the school year that will be part of the community school program design. The Community School Director will work closely with the DOE Parent Coordinator and the Parent Teacher Association in en effort to not only support their work but to find opportunities to enhance their efforts by investing financial and human resources. Ongoing communication and a culture of “customer service” will be implemented to ensure that families feel respected and welcome this will include staff that are fully Bi-lingual in Spanish and English, and that literature and flyers that are sent home are translated. 4) During our initial planning meetings, an expectation has been established that the Community School Director will be a participant in all current school governance structures such as Principal Cabinet and SLT. The CSD will also participate in student support meetings such Attendance Meeting and Student Intervention Teams. Additionally, new structures will be implemented to support the work including monthly Community Schools Team Meeting and Provider Meetings that will include school and CBO providers. Formal, and ongoing check-ins with the principal will take that will include the CSD and the CBO supervisor. This will be an opportunity to discuss progress, problem solve and to jointly plan. The CSD will be expected to master the Data Sorter ensuring that the school obtains a comfort level with the tool and that the data is being used to make informed decisions. Part 4 – Community School Partnerships Oversight 4  Part 4a. Key Staff and Partners 1. Name and describe the scope of involvement of all community partners working in the school (include partners supporting ELT, counseling, enrichment, etc.) 2. Name the members of your Community School Team and how meetings will be organized and structured to engage all stakeholders and be focused on results. 3. Explain data strategies including the use of the data sorter, and steps that the school will take to ensure that the appropriate interventions are provided to the right students 1) To date, several partners have been identified that will support the community school work. In the area of ELT; there is SASF, SCORES Soccer and Poetry, New York Urban Debate League, National Dance Institute and Scores. Aspira will be responsible for providing after school enrichment, recreation to 100 students while Scores will offer a soccer program. The process of identifying additional partners continues and will ultimately be updated. The CSD will be expected to focus on the areas of Health, ELT, Attendance, and Family Engagement. 2) The CST will be held monthly will a core group of participants that will include the principal, the CSD, an assistant principal, parents, teachers, students and CBO partners. The expectations for the meeting are: Provide updates along with data on progress and impact to date on all 4 core service areas: School Culture, Attendance, ELT and Family Engagement. Joint planning around special events and initiatives. Forum for different stakeholders to voice concerns and to bring proposal to the attention to the CST. 3) It is the intention of 161M to do the following: Continue the Success Mentor program to work with students at risk of or chronically absent. Assess Attendance Team to determine if changes need to be made to improve monitoring and progress of students at risk. Continue the use of the Data Sorter. Ensure that key staff are trained and that there is a comfort level with using the data to inform the work Continue our school wide attendance initiative that includes incentives for individual students and classes, assembly celebrations, and visuals around attendance. Actively seek to engage parents/caregivers in the effort to improve attendance through ongoing outreach. Part 4b. Indicate resources needed including human resources, instructional resources, and schedule adjustments to implement the Community School program. 161M Community Schools will want to use the budget to creatively address the 4 core service areas. Additionally, we will want support to ensure that we can effectively implement the Community Schools strategy of organizing all of the financial and human resources. Part 4c. Timeline for implementation and completion, including start and end dates. 5  July 2018-August 2018 – Visioning, Budget Development, Marketing, Recruitment of staff and Partner Meetings September 2018 – December 2018 – Marketing/Initial Program Implementation January 2019 – June 2019 – Programs continue. Needs Assessment. CS Forum Part 4d. Mental Health Work Plan Separate from this S/CEP, schools will complete a Mental Health Work Plan that will become an addendum to this document. 6  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 7  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: Title III Funds will be used as follows: A. Early Morning Program • Targeted Population: All populations of ENLs in the “transitioning and expanding” language level as per 2016 NYSESLAT scores. • Grade Levels: 6-8 . Number of Students: 15 per class (2 classes) • Goal: to increase ELLs’ English proficiency as well as their academic skills in English Language Arts. Teachers will use leveled shared reading and shared writing (based on Fountas & Pinnell reading levels) to increase student academic vocabulary (Tier I, II, and III words) and well as reading and writing skills. . Language: English • Program: English as a Second Language • Time Frame: November 12, 2016 to March 26th, 2017 (16 weeks) - Sessions: 32 total • Hours: 7:00 am to 8:00 am (1 hour) x 2 days a week • Staff: 1 Certified ESL teacher and 1 certified bilingual teacher (ESL teacher will target 7/8 grade ENL students and bilingual certified teacher will target 6th grade ENL students) . Materials: Fountas & Pinnell Leveled Classroom Library (fiction and nonfiction texts) B.1 After School Program Content Area - ESL: • Targeted Population: All populations of ENL students in the TRANSITIONING, EXPANDING, and COMMANDING (within the 2 year window of ESL support) language level as per 2016 NYSESLAT results. • Goal: to increase ENLs’ English proficiency as well as their academic skills in both English and Math. Data based instruction, focusing on major content strands for both ELA and Math. Topics of Instruction: Instruction will be based on data (unit tests, running records, writing pieces, classroom observations). Teachers will utilize ESL approaches to teach targeted skills (as per data results) based on CCLS and grade level major strands. For math, teachers will be using Georgia Standards Curriculum Activities and Go-Math curriculum in grades 3-5 and CMP3, EngageNY activities and software technology (Dreambox, IMXL) in grades 6-8. For ELA, teachers will use Fountas & Pinnell Leveled Classroom Libraries (fiction and nonfiction texts) as well as software such as Article a Day, RAZ Kids, and MyOn. . Language of instruction: English • Standards: Common Core Learning Standards and New York State (NYS) and Standards for teaching English as a Second Language (ESL) • Time Frame: November 12, 2016 to March 26, 2017; Sessions: 32 in total • Hours & Frequency: 2:30 pm to 4:00 pm (1.5 hours) x 2 days a week (16 weeks) • 4 content area teachers (content area to target ENL students whose parents chose Freestanding ESL (Grades 3-8) B2 After School Program - Dual Language 8  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information . Targeted Population: All populations of ENL students currently enrolled in a dual language program in grades 3-6. Invitation is extended to EP students as well. . Goal: to increase ENLs' English proficiency as well as their academic skills in both English and Math. Data based instruction, focusing on major content strands for both ELA and Math. Topics of Instruction: Instruction will be based on data (unit tests, running records, writing pieces, classroom observations). Teachers will utilize ESL approaches to teach targeted skills (as per data results) based on CCLS and grade level major strands. For math, teachers will be using Georgia Standards Curriculum Activities and Go-Math curriculum in grades 3-5 and CMP3, EngageNY activities and software technology (Dreambox, IMXL) in grades 6-8. For ELA, teachers will use Fountas & Pinnell Leveled Classroom Libraries (fiction and nonfiction texts) as well as software such as Article a Day, RAZ Kids, and MyOn. . Language of Instruction: English & Spanish (One day English, one day Spanish) . Time Frame: November 12, 2016 to March 26, 2017; Sessions: 32 in total • Hours & Frequency: 2:30 pm to 4:00 pm (1.5 hours) x 2 days a week (16 weeks) • 4 bilingual certified teachers C. Materials & Resources: The school will purchase literacy classroom materials through Department of Education approved vendors. Materials will follow under any of the following categories: • Independent low-leveled reading books (approx. $7,000) . Software ($4,000) Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: Professional development for ESL, Bilingual, and Content Area teachers regarding instructional approaches for ENL students is embedded in our overall 2016/2017 Professional Development (PD) Plan. This means, that there will be no cost to the Title III program for the implementation of these PDs. Our 2016/17 Professional Development Plan states that Literacy Instructional Coaches will be responsible for providing professional development workshops, co-planning and demonstrating lessons, conducting assessments, as well as individually meeting with teachers to reflect on instruction and plan next steps. Instructional coaches work with teachers in cycles which includes an ESL teacher every six weeks. We will also contract Teachers College and Generation Ready to provide in-service workshops for all of our teachers. Professional Development will be differentiated and aligned to teachers' and students' needs. The "Modifications Group" which includes ESL and Special Education teachers will focus on differentiated instruction and therefore explore concepts such as Implementation of CCLS and Instructional Shifts through the ELL and SPED lenses, Universal Design of Learning (UDL) to create access points for all students, Understanding by Design (UBD) to create engaging unit maps that include proper scaffold to address the needs of students, 9  Part C: Professional Development Depth of Knowledge (DOK) to gradually challenge students and Components of Balanced Literacy to plan and implement small group instruction. The administration has provided one common planning period to all co-teachers (content area and ESL teachers) assigned to an ESL self-contained environment. Teachers use common planning periods to collaboratively plan and incorporate what they have learned into their teaching practices. Staff Development (2016 - 2017 Activities) Literacy: Teachers College: • Teachers College Literacy for Primary Level (k-2): 8 days x 90minX12classes • Teachers College Literacy for Elementary Level (3-5): 8 days x 90minX12classes • Teachers College Literacy for Middle School Level (6-8): 8 days x 90minX12classes • TC Workshops for ESL & Bilingual Teachers 8 days (all day) Instructional Coaches: • Weekly Professional Development sessions with ESL Teachers 50minx1xWeek Math • Southern Cross Consultants for K-5: 8 days x 90minX12classes • Generation Ready for Middle School Level (6-8): 8 days x 90minX12classes Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: Parent Coordinator along with the administration, instructional coach and teachers will host several orientation sessions for the parents of ELLs. Monthly calendars, posters, fliers and phone blasts will be translated to all representative languages in our building and will be utilize to inform parents of community building activities for ELLs. We are fortunate to have bilingual staff (French, Spanish and Arabic) who willingly translate for parents during meetings. Some of the topics include: 1. How to Help My ELL Child at Home 2. Read Aloud Night for ELL parents 3. Understanding the NYC High School Application Process - for ELL parents In addition, our technology coach and middle school technology teacher will host monthly workshops for parents that will focus on improving parents' technology skills. Additionally, parents of ELLs will be invited to weekly attend technology workshops held on Tuesdays from 2:20 pm to 3:30 pm. Each parent will receive a username and a password that they can use in the school's computer lab. 0 Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits)  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL 1  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 5 School Name Don Pedro Albizu Campos Borough Manhattan School Number 161 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Pamela Price Coach Ryan Cannata ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Judy Soto-Solivan Teacher/Subject Area Milton Polo/Math & Science Teacher/Subject Area type here Related-Service Provider Frank DeJesus Superintendent Gale Reeves Assistant Principal Nazda Palchik-Medina Coach Madeline Block School Counselor Nelson Fernandez Parent Maria Kelly Parent Coordinator Kareem Williams Field Support Center Staff Member type here Other (Name and Title) type here C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 0 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 3 6 2 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 7 0 D. Student Demographics 2  Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 892 Total number of ELLs 241 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 27.02% Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): SP Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 1 0 1 1 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 1 1 4 0 1 1 3 0 1 1 2 0 1 1 5 0 1 1 6 0 1 1 7 0 0 0 8 0 0 0 9 0 0 0 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 7 0 0 7 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? PS/MS 161 follows the Teacher’s College Reading and Writing Program (TCRWP). Based on this literacy approach, teachers evaluate the early literacy skills of students, including ELLs, by conducting a series of assessments such as letter/sound ID, high frequency words, running records, spelling inventories, on-demand writing samples, as well as comprehension and critical thinking tasks. Most of our ELL students come from a Hispanic/Latino background. Therefore, we decided to also use - following the TCRWP philosophy- a Spanish version of all these assessment (Fountas & Pinnell -Spanish Running Recirds). This information gives us the insights we need to create appropriate instructional plans for the year. PS/MS 161 has a history of having high numbers of English Language Learners. We are considered the "bilingual school" in District 5. One-third of our students are ELLs and many proficient students were at some point ELLs in our building. Therefore, differentiated instruction is a must in our building. All lesson plans must follow UDL formats and must include language objectives. Literacy data also 3  shows that approximately two-thirds of the newly enrolled ELL students come with very little to no exposure to literacy. In addition, the analysis of letter/sound assessments in conjunction with running records and spelling inventories show that most Hispanic/Latino ELL students struggle with vowel sounds in the English language. Therefore, we decided that in ESL self-contained and Dual Language classrooms word study periods should be increase from two times to at least four times a week. In the upper grade and middle school level, data shows that our students' NYSESLAT scores do not match neither their reading levels nor their ELA scores. Therefore, this year although teachers will keep on working on decoding and fluency with their students, staff and ESL providers will focus more in comprehension and the application of reading skills. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? In order to evaluate the effectiveness of our ELL programs, the School Leadership Team and the Professional Development Team follow these steps: a. Conduct an analysis of ELL’s scores in NY state assessments such as NYSESLAT, ELA and MATH. During this stage, members of these teams compare students’ NYSESLAT language proficiency to ELA scores and TCRWP reading levels. Based on this analysis, teams are able to identify trends across the ELL population in our school. The needs analysis then leads to the development of objectives for our ELL programs. b. Develops a professional development plan for teachers focusing on designing coherent instruction, engaging students in learning and assessing student progress c. Develop a curriculum, based on the objectives, that identifies tasks and skills for all language components d. Plan instruction by gathering text materials and realia, determining classroom activities, and identifying opportunities for learners to put their skills in practice in and outside the classroom. e. Determine instructional strategies that include a variety of activities that focus on the objectives, keep the class learner-centered, and include as much paired and group work as possible. Strategies for assessment are also determined when planning instruction. f. Evaluate the programs based on formative and summativ assessments. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] PS/MS 161 has implemented the research based “Response to Intervention” (RTI) program for all students designated at risk in order to prevent a referral to the Committee on Special Education. This includes a referral system of three tiers of intervention to address their literacy and mathematic deficiencies. Tier I and Tier II address these needs in the classroom environment, whereas Tier 3 –the highest level of support- is devoted to rich instructional and reinforcement activities twice a day for thirty minutes outside of the classroom. Tier 1 is the instructional core that is intended to incorporate high quality evidence-based instruction for all students. This includes instruction that has been shown to be effective for ELLs, and differentiation to meet students’ diverse needs. Instruction for ELLs in English language development is provided at the Tier 1 instructional level. Evidence of Tier 1 planning includes: UDL lessons, language objectives, targeted group activities, and a leveled library among others. ELL students are moved into Tier 2 and Tier 3 if they demonstrate a need for more targeted and intensive academic support. This extra support can occur in the classroom thorugh small group instruction, but also in separate settings with instruction focused on specific learning targets. Tier 2 and Tier 3 instruction in our school is tailored to meet ELLs’ language needs and is incorporated into research-based intervention strategies. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. 4  Based on the most recent Spring 2015 NYSESLAT and NYSITELL results, PS/MS 161 has 177 Newcomer ELLs (0-3 years), 56 Developing ELLs (4-6) and 8 Long-Term ELLs (7+). In the Newcomers category (177), 58 students are in the entering level, 22 in emerging, 25 in transitioning and 52 in the expanding proficiency level. In the Developing category (57), 39 are in the expanding level. The remaining 18 students scored in lower levels and are mostly students with disabilities. The same applies for those students in the Long-Term category (8) where 6 out of 8 are students with disabilities. As far as NYSESLAT components, we did best on speaking, with about 78% of ELL students meeting the minimum threshold for proficiency. We were roughly equivalent on all other components (listening, reading, and writing) ranging from 50% to 56%. In the upper grade and middle school level (mostly advanced ELLs), data shows that our students' NYSESLAT scores do not match neither their reading levels nor their ELA scores. Therefore, this year although teachers will keep on working on decoding and fluency with their students, staff and ESL providers will focus more in comprehension and the application of reading skills. Data also suggests that a rigorous writing program is crucial. In accordance to this, the Professional Development Team has created a plan targeting student writing skills. Expectations include incorporating writing in all subject areas, using questioning and discussion techniques to rehearse writing and using language objectives to improve writing. Although NYSESLAT data indicates that when planning ESL instruction for the ELL population at our school there should be considerable attention to plan lessons that develop writing skills, teachers will still implement instruction that addresses all four language modalities until children reach proficiency levels in all language components. To do so, teachers are continuously gathering data from different available assessments. Periodic Assessments are used to inform planning and teaching. Data also allows teachers to address students’ needs in small group instruction settings. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. The instruction delivered at our school follows various organizational models. In regards to the ESL Program, instruction is delivered to the students using a self-contained model in which general education teachers and ESL providers co-teach in the classroom to ensure that ELL students received content instruction along with the mandated ESL support which will allow them to meet grade-level standards. In the middle school, ELLs move as a group to their different classes. Grouping students together and having an ESL instructor co-teaching with the content area/common branch teacher in the classroom, allows the school to meet and go beyond the mandated integrated ESL minutes stated by law. Standalone ESL is included in the schedule twice a week for all ESL self-contained classes. ESL Self-Contained Program: • This academic year there are eight ESL self-contained classes (1-8). • The program folows a Collaborative Team Teaching Model: one General Education teacher along with an ESL povider povide instruction in an ESL self-contained environment. This allows a consistent implementation of an integrated ENL model in our building. Stand alone minytes are scheduled twice a week in all ESL classrooms. • Grade-level instruction is provided by a fully certified General Education teacher while ESL instruction is provided by a fully certified ESL teacher in each of these classes. • The ESL self-contained program is monitored by a certified assistant principal. 5  b. TBE program. If applicable. Not applicable. c. DL program. If applicable. In the Dual Language Program, PS/MS 161 has adopted the self-contained model. In this environment, bilingual certified teachers provide not only grade level content but also provide the mandated ESL services required by law. As in the ESL self-contained classes, having students together allows the school not only to meet but go above the mandated integrated and standalone mandated minutes. Dual Language Program: • This academic year there are seven classes (K-6) implementing a dual language self-contained model. • In our Dual Language program, the targeted languages of proficiency are Spanish and English. • The English proficiency level of each student is measured each year by the NYSESLAT and then the level of instruction is determined, appropriated and reflected in classroom instruction. • Dual Language programs are monitored by a certified assistant principal. 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? The organization of our staff is instituted in such a way to ensure that the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels for each of our students. In regards to the Dual Language Program, academic instruction takes place through both languages on a 50/50 every other day model. All subjects are taught in both English and in Spanish on different days. Instruction that is delivered in English is taught using ESL strategies, methods, and techniques. During days where instruction is delivered in Spanish, students receive literacy, math, and all other content areas in this language. In the ESL Program, the collaborative team teaching and self-contained environment allows teachers to provide grade-level instruction while including ESL support and language objectives that tat meet the needs of the ELL population. Thanks to this model, ELL students never miss content instruction and the ESL support is embedded in all lessons, in all subjects and at all times during the school day. Having ESL instructors assigned to each of these classrooms also ensures that all ELL students receive the mandated integrated and stand alone minutes (consistent with CR part 154 units of ESL requirements). 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. In the Dual Language Program, content area instruction -this includes math, science and social studies- is delivered in both languages, English and Spanish. At 161, we followed the self-contained dual language model alternating the L1 and L2 throughout the school year. Dual Language teachers will use cooperative learning, thematic units, hands-on materials and visual and graphic displays to teach content area material. The classroom will have language rich environments and use strategies such as having the students use language (vocabulary and language structure) to explain their thinking in project based experiences. The teachers use modeling and scaffolding in their instruction and provide daily objectives that will enhance reading, writing, listening and speaking skills in both languages. The instructional model uses the core curriculum which focuses on balanced literacy and mathematics and it is in alignment with the Common Core Standards. Content area materials (GoMath, CMP3, and textbooks) are ordered in English and Spanish for all students in the dual language classrooms. ESL services given in ESL self-contained classrooms, is provided by six fully certified ESL teachers in a co-teaching environment. The English proficiency level of each student is measured each year by the NYSESLAT and then the level of instruction is appropriately determined for instruction. In PS/MS 161, ESL instruction is aligned to the NYS Common Core Learning Learning Standards and the NYS Blueprint for English as a Second Language; the teaching of language arts to limited English proficient/English Language Learners. ESL teachers use strategies within the balanced literacy model to deliver 6  academic instruction to provide additional support for our students and all lessons are conducted in small group settings. The instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to enrich language development vary according to the subject. In mathematics we use guided math strategies to make the content comprehensible for the various math proficiency levels in the classroom. Activities may include math games and written reflections that pertain to the activities. Teachers facilitate this writing and language development by providing math language within lessons and in the classroom environment (math word walls, sentence starters, and visuals). Students are taught with graphic organizers to learn to organize the information from a problem and note the strategies they will use. Technology is used in mathematics, science and social studies as well to make content comprehensible and to enrich language development. ESL teachers integrate technology in lessons when modeling, using for active engagement and/or for independent work. Websites such as Starfall, ESL-activities, A to Z Learning, RAZ Kids, Brainpop and other sites with interactive games are infused with lessons to address the different kinds of learners and the language component in need. In dual language classrooms, the Brainpop resource as well as the A to Z Learning website are available in both Spanish and English and are used accordingly with the language of instruction of the day. Therefore, students understand the content and interact with the matter in diverse ways (through minilessons, partner talks, labs, independent work, and group activities). Shared reading, guided reading, strategy lessons and read alouds are some instructional approaches used in social studies and science to make the content comprehensible and to enrich the language development of ELL students. Through shared reading students learn the content as they work on the reading together. In guided reading with a non-fiction book at their level, a small group of students are introduced to a book, read on their own and the teacher listens in to gather data for a teaching point on the fluency. During strategy lessons a diverse group of readers (diverse in terms of their reading levels) gather with a teacher who shares a teaching point to address a lesson that is needed with this group. The teacher models and the students practice this in their own book. The content-specific read alouds are instructional methods used throughout the different content areas to learn both content and for language development. In dual language classrooms, components of balanced literacy are used to teach in both English and Spanish. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? In order to ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their native language, we have created and implemented running records, spelling inventories, reading skills and comprehension assessments as well as on-demand writing assessments in Spanish. In our school we also use results from the LAB-R Spanish and the ELE to plan instruction for the Spanish speaking ELLs. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status As in all areas of instruction, teachers differentiate instruction for all the ELL population. This is done by grouping students by language development, language component, reading level, and/ or writing level. a. Plan for SIFE - At PS/MS 161, new students who first entered our English language school system after grade two with interrupted, little, or no formal schooling in their first language are first immersed in technology based literacy and language programs. Additionally, the school has designated a RTI (instructional intervention) specialist to provide these students with effective strategies in small group settings during school hours. b. Plan for ELLs in school less than 3 years/ Newcomers – All ELL students who have been in the system for less than three years receive intensive small group instruction conducted by the classroom teachers and ESL teachers. These students will be exposed to idiomatic language, use books with repetitive language, engage in conversational practice with students, listen for relevant and irrelevant information, introduce auditory stories, engage students in conversational practice, expose students to multiple media sources and provide opportunities for students to hear and produce various sounds. Literacy coaches will also work with groups of ELL students to provide extra support for these students. 7  At PS/MS 161, teachers use different components of balanced literacy to address the speaking needs of ELLs. For instance, interactive read alouds are part of the everyday routine. Student partnerships are part of the reading and writing workshop and book clubs run in all classrooms for five consecutive reading units. ESL teachers are constantly assessing ELLs’ oral skills in order to increase their fluency of their presentation of knowledge and ideas. Instruction at this stage also includes the following components: • Shared Reading : Short texts, (poems, rhymes, songs, chants, articles) are carefully chosen by the teacher and presented in large text, placed on smart board or provided for each student. The ESL teacher selects specific chunks of the text, as a demonstration piece, to teach a reading/writing/word skill or strategy. • Shared and Interactive Writing: In the earlier stages of language development, ESL teachers invite students to take risks in recording their oral sentences, with their aid, into written text. (Approximately 10-15 minutes) • Word Study/Phonics: Depending upon language stage, it includes the teaching of words, word families, root words in the upper grades and learning about letters, sounds and words in the earlier grades. • Guided Reading: This activity is led by the teacher and done with short-term, transient, ability-based groups. It is followed by a teaching point. (Approximately 20-30 minutes) c. Plan for ELLs in school 4-6 years/Developing : Additionally, we will be using balanced literacy components, which stress the essential dimensions of reading through explicit teaching of phonics, phonemic awareness, fluency and expressiveness, vocabulary, and comprehension, to help these students. Based on this approach, teachers demonstrate the habits and strategies of effective reading and writing through a variety of structures: read-aloud, guided reading, shared reading, interactive writing, and mini-lessons in reading and writing. By coaching students in individual or small-group conferences, teachers allow students to successfully and independently apply those strategies to their own reading and writing. d. Plan for ELLs in school 6 years completed or more/Long Term ELLs : Based on data, most of our long term ELLs show evidence of having trouble with the reading and writing components. Therefore, we have decided that the focus of instruction for long term ELLs will be teaching reading and writing skills. ESL students who have not met the performance standard in reading will improve their comprehension skills through instruction in independent, guided and shared reading. Teachers will incorporate contextualized word-study and phonemic awareness activities to improve fluency and accuracy. Each of our classrooms is equipped with an updated, leveled library of fiction and non-fiction books in all genres. ESL students’ writing skills will be strengthened by the use of intensive group and one-on-one work focusing on qualities of good writing and additional focused help on spelling and grammar. Additionally, multiple strategies such as graphic organizers, small writing groups, the use of personal word walls, and visuals are always a part of teachers’ lesson plans. Finally, the extended day program, which has a strong writing component, will scaffold and promote writing fluency. e. Transitional Student Support Plan ELLs that test out of the NYSESLAT receive two more years of extra support from a certified ESL teacher. Transitional students will remain in the ESL self-contained classes and receive the same support as their ELL peers. Classroom teachers will be informed about these students and will be asked to pay extra attention to their academic development. Transitional students will be part of any small group instruction that the classroom teacher considers appropriate. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? Plan for ELLs in school with Special Needs - At PS/MS 161, 7% of students have IEPs in which it is recommended for them to receive ESL or bilingual instruction. These students are entitled to receive a multidisciplinary/multimodal instruction that will help them increase their proficiency in all four language components (speaking, listening, reading and writing) while providing the special support they need to meet their individual academic needs. In order to achieve this goal, students are placed in the least restrictive environment to address their learning and social-emotional needs, including ESL services. At PS/MS 161, this includes four integrative co-teaching (ICT) classes and six Self-Contained classrooms (two of them bilingual). Counseling services will also be provided to help develop social and emotional awareness in such a way that their academic 8  achievement improves. Our school will provide and maintain a Pupil Personnel Team (PPT) to meet the needs of our students. The team will ensure that identified students receive proper interventions. Our school will provide and maintain School Based Health Services for all students, which will ensure that referrals from school personnel and parents be forwarded to the appropriate agencies. Finally, the school community and parents will work collaboratively to ensure overall students’ academic, social and emotional well being. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? In regards to using the curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to meet the diverse needs of ELL-SWDs within the least restrictive environment, in PS/MS 161, many of our ELL-SWDs receive their day-to-day academic instruction and services within the general education environment. With this in mind, scheduling has been designed in order to ensure students (those mandated to receive SETSS or ICT) are able to receive both their ESL and Special Education services through either a push-in or pull-out model by the service provider. For those students whose Individualized Education Programs (IEPs) mandate they receive special education support and services in a small class, the schedule is flexibly planned as such so they receive their mandated ESL services in a small group. The instructional groupings for these students, however, is not solely based on their IEP mandates but also takes into consideration their current ELL status level which, will provide them with the opportunity to receive ESL services with other ELL students who are in the general education setting 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. Intervention Programs for ELLs- PS/MS 161 has implemented the research based “Response to Intervention” (RTI) program for all students designated at risk in order to prevent a referral to the Committee on Special Education. This includes a referral system of three tiers of intervention to address their literacy and mathematic deficiencies. Tier I and Tier II address these needs in the classroom environment, whereas Tier 3 –the highest level of support- is devoted to rich instructional and reinforcement activities twice a day for thirty minutes outside of the classroom. ELL students who have been identified as at risk will receive RTI and ESL services on a daily basis. RTI services focuses on literacy and math while ESL services concentrates on language objectives and the acquisition of a second language throughout literacy and other content areas. With the adoption of the ESL-self-contained model in our school, General Education and ESL teachers plan rigorous small group instruction that provide ELLs with standard-based content knowledge and the needed scaffold to meet grade level goals. Targeted interventions for ELA and Math includes: RTI services three times a week, affter school program three times a week, Saturday program once a week. In literacy, RTI providers use Fountas & Pinnell Guided Reading materials to conduct targeted small group instrtuction based on NYSESLAT and ELA scores. In Math, intervention is done in small groups and based on state Math Scores and other in-house formative and summative assessments. Additionally, PS/MS 161 also offers an Academic Morning Program, and Academic After School Program and a “Power Saturday School Program. These intervention programs have been designed to meet the needs of all students who have been identified as at-risk –including ELLs- through various formal and informal assessments. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? This year we are also providing an after school program for all ELLs who have been in the country for less than three years. Based on research, teachers in PS/MS 161 believe in the existence of a strong and positive correlation between literacy in a student’s native language and learning English as a second language. Most of our new arrivals, however, show minimal literacy in their home language. Therefore, it becomes imperative for us to teach these students about the practical purposes of written language and how to make sense of text in their own language first. Students who learn how to apply reading and writing strategies in their own language first, will be able to transfer all this information once they are ready to transition into the new language. In PS/MS 161 we not only believe in the importance of a solid native language foundation, but also agree on the necessity and urgency of immersing students in the new language to make transition time sooner and less drastic. To achieve all the above mentioned goals during this afterschool program, we have agreed to teach two days in Spanish (native language of 98% of our new arrivals) and one day in English. 9  10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? None 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. In PS/MS 161, ELLs have equal access to all school programs. ELL students participate in all after school programs, extra-curricular activities (arts and music), Power Saturday Program, and RTI services if they have been targeted as at-risk. New arrivals are eligible to participate in an special after school program that emphasizes native language literacy (Spanish) and beginning English Phonics (See # 11 above for more information about this after school program) 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. Instructional materials & technology- In order to support the learning of ELLs, the following are the instructional materials implemented within curriculum areas: A. Students will participate daily in our Rosetta Stone language program. Also, all classrooms have all day access to resources on the internet such as StarFall, United Stream, Brain Pop, etc. B. ELLs in Monolingual Classrooms receiving ESL services. 1) Grades K – 3rd a) Balanced Literacy in English • Balanced Literacy Classroom libraries • Month by month phonics • 120 minute literacy block (balanced literacy including daily writing activities) 2) Grades 4th - 8th • Balanced Literacy classroom libraries • 120 minute literacy block (balanced literacy including daily writing activities) C. Grades K – 6th Dual Language (Refer to Narrative for Program Description) • Balanced literacy in English (alternating day model) • Balanced literacy in Spanish (alternating day model) • Balanced Literacy Classroom Libraries (both English and Spanish) • 120 minutes literacy block (balanced literacy including daily writing activities) • NYC English Language Arts Performance Standards and Mathematics D. Science • MacMillan Science Program K – 8th grade • Literature links throughout learning experiences • Macmillan Science Program K –8thgrade in Spanish for Dual Language classrooms • Classroom libraries with 50% non-fiction expository text • Integration to Science Lab E. Social Studies • McGraw Hill Social Studies K-8th grade • McGraw Hill K-8th grade in Spanish for Dual Language classrooms • Standards based scope & sequence for core curriculum for grades K – 8 • Classroom libraries with 50% nonfiction, expository text • Literature links throughout learning experiences 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? In dual language classrooms, students receive native language instruction (Spanish) every other day. During these days, lessons are conducted in Spanish (targeted language) in all subject areas. This allows students to gain background knowledge in both languages and, therefore, able to transfer knowledge from one language to another, throughout all units of studies. Additionally, all new arrivals in monolingual classrooms whose parents opted for ESL services, are eligible to participate in the Native Language Arts Afterschool Program which focuses on Spanish literacy skills. 00  14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. All required services, support, and resources for ELL students are age and grade level appropriate. All classrooms have a well-stocked library with levels that range from A to Z and that includes a variety of genres in fiction and nonfiction, which is used by teachers to address individual student’s needs at their current reading level. In PS/MS 161, we also have a resource room where teachers can find a variety of resources for all subject areas and also tools for the application of any of the components of balanced literacy. We also have a well-stock Spanish library that dual language teachers from all grade levels use to match resources to the specific units under study. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? Instructional materials & technology- In order to support the learning of ELLs, the following are the instructional materials implemented within curriculum areas: A. Students will participate daily in our Rosetta Stone language program. Also, all classrooms have all day access to resources on the internet such as StarFall, United Stream, Brain Pop, etc. B. ELLs in Monolingual Classrooms receiving ESL services. 1) Grades K – 3rd a) Balanced Literacy in English • Balanced Literacy Classroom libraries • Month by month phonics • 120 minute literacy block (balanced literacy including daily writing activities) 2) Grades 4th - 8th • Balanced Literacy classroom libraries • 120 minute literacy block (balanced literacy including daily writing activities) C. Grades K – 6th Dual Language (Refer to Narrative for Program Description) • Balanced literacy in English (alternating day model) • Balanced literacy in Spanish (alternating day model) • Balanced Literacy Classroom Libraries (both English and Spanish) • 120 minutes literacy block (balanced literacy including daily writing activities) • NYC English Language Arts Performance Standards and Mathematics D. Science • MacMillan Science Program K – 8th grade • Literature links throughout learning experiences • Macmillan Science Program K –8thgrade in Spanish for Dual Language classrooms • Classroom libraries with 50% non-fiction expository text • Integration to Science Lab E. Social Studies • McGraw Hill Social Studies K-8th grade • McGraw Hill K-8th grade in Spanish for Dual Language classrooms • Standards based scope & sequence for core curriculum for grades K – 8 • Classroom libraries with 50% nonfiction, expository text • Literature links throughout learning experiences 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). To assist newly enrolled ELL students before school starts, we have partnered with many community based organizations to provide services to this population. Also, our school provides parent orientations and encourages parents to visit the school and a classroom during summer time. In order to prepare students for the transition into a new school, we also provide parents with school work packets that include some literacy and math activities that they can start implementing with their children at home. 01  17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? In middle school, newly enrolled ELLs are only offered two language electives: English and their Native Language (mostly Spanish). Middle school ELL students who have been in the country for more than three years, follow a six-week rotation language program (Rosetta Stone) in which students are exposed to different languages in a specific period of time. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? a. The Dual Language model used at our school is a self-contained model. This model is consistent from grades K-6. Each class is composed of 50% English Proficient and 50% English Language Learners. The students remain in their classrooms for all content area and English Language Arts instruction. There is one teacher per classroom who teaches in the language of the day (English or Spanish) accordingly. b. The EPs and ELLs are always integrated during the instructional day. No content areas are taught separately. Teachers use the student data to plan small group instruction. Reading and writing lessons reflect this instruction in strategy lessons and guided reading lessons. Although students participate in the same lesson, the small group work gives them the opportunity to interact with a teacher on a more personal level and to interact with a smaller group of students. In these moments students may not be integrated depending on their reading levels or writing craft needs. For example, some ELLs reading at level F may be together for a guided reading group during independent reading in their reading workshop. In such an example, EPs and ELLs are not integrated in the same small group but they are integrated in the overarching lesson with the whole class. This differs with content area lessons. Here, although students are designated as EPs or ELLs, their proficiency in mathematics, science or social studies place them in integrated small group work. Teachers plan lessons that are differentiated in process, content or product. c. The Dual Language model ensures that the instruction is consistent with the language of the day. The every other day model is followed in the language of instruction. Content area is taught in the language assigned for that specific day. On the following day, the lesson from the previous day is not translated or repeated in a different language. Instead, the teacher continues with the following lesson, giving students the opportunity to transfer the information. This also ensures that the time allotted for the target language is 50% in each grade. d. The Dual Language model used at our school is a self-contained model. e. Emergent literacy is sequential for grades K-2 in this Dual Language Model. In their newcomers’ small group, the student in K-2 is taught in their native language on both English and Spanish days. The change comes in grade 3 and up when students are taught both languages at the same time. The exception to this is SIFE students who are taught in sequential form as the model follows in grades K-2. 02  Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? Through 15 whole-school day sessions, teachers work in the school building with both the literacy coach and the staff developers in groups, collaborating professionally. The groupings of teachers are deliberate and differentiated based on teacher need as connected to Danielson’s framework. All professional learning that takes place with the staff developers begins with goal setting to establish coherence as teachers make their way through cycles of work. These goals are then connected to job-embedded professional development, resulting in teachers using strategies learned in these sessions in their day-to-day lessons. The structuring of teacher groups are based on differentiated needs. Teachers fall into one of four different groups: Curriculum Based Learning, Lifting the Level of the Curriculum, Modifications for Reading and Writing Workshop and Content Area Literacy. The Modifications Group was designed in response to the school’s large population of English Language Learners and students with disabilities, our TC staff developer works with ESL and special education teachers to read and work with the curriculum through the lens of differentiation. This group focuses on how to scaffold the curriculum to meet the needs of ELLs and SWD’s. During the first cycle of work the developer informed, modeled and then with teachers created a differentiated version of guided reading, targeting upper elementary/middle school students that could still benefit from the practice. PD Days are scheduled as follows: Cycle 1: October/November (4 sessions) Cycle 2: January/February (4 sessions) Cycle 3: March/April (4 sessions) Cycle 4: June Planning (2 sessions) Content Area teachers (Science, Math and Social Studies) are often participating in OELL workshops pertinent to their subject. Teachers College Reading and Writing Project In-House Professional Development (17 days a year) - In PS/MS 161, we also differentiate professional development for our teachers. As such, all ESL teachers have been assigned to the "Modifications" group which meets to study the curriculum and design strategies that will support ELLs in the different units o study. District ELL Professional Development Series: 3 PD days a year. Focus: Aligning ESL INstruction to the CCLS Instructional Shifts OELL Professional Development as per requested. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. In PS/MS 161, we provide staff with the support they need to assist ELLs as they transition from elementary to middle school and/or middle to high school. For instance, the administration offer and encourage teachers to attend outside professional development that focuses on ESL strategies that are appropriate for the different middle and high school age. In- house professional development, on the other hand, focuses on teaching staff strategies that build vocabulary and foster language development through literacy and the content areas. We also assist our middle school ELL students in finding the high school that best fit their needs. Professional Development includes: 03  Three full day TCRWP Professional Development sessions will be devoted specifically to ELL services. The Co-Teaching Environment in the ESL Self-Contained Classroom Data Based Instruction: Analyzing ELL Student Work to Drive Small Group Instruction Differentiating Instruction in the ELL classroom Strategies that develop literacy in ELLs Balanced Literacy for ELLs Resources for ELLs • In addition to the above PD sessions, each session will include in-service workshops and demonstration lessons. • All newly appointed teachers serving ELLs will be provided with the assistance of the school based learning specialists to assist them in planning, delivery of instruction and assessment. • All teachers serving ELLs will be encouraged to participate in the Office of English Language Learners (OELL) professional development offerings. • All new teachers, including special education teachers, will be provided with 7 hours of professional development in ESL strategies. • ESL teachers participate in all TCRWP staff developing days –our school has 17 full days of TC training for this year. • ESL teachers and school administrators will attend monthly ELL professional development provided by our network (eigth in total). • Teachers will use common planning periods to collaboratively incorporate what they learned into their teaching practices. All PD agendas and minutes are stored digitally in Google Drive folders. Staff selected to attend outside PDs are required to submit their notes through Google documents. In this way, we ensure all information is shared with the rest of the team. In-house agendas and minutes are also kept in the school's Google Drive folders. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? In PS/MS 161, we effectively used Parent-Engagement Time every Tuesday from 2:20 to 3:00 pm. Teachers use this time to call parents, set up appointments, meet with parents, write progress report cards and/or create letters to be sent home. ESL teachers collaboratively plan meetings with parents of ELL during this time. During this time, ESL teachers inform parents of their child's language development in all content areas. At all times, letters, calls, and meetings accommodate the parent's language of preference. Teachers are expected to enter this in the Parent-School Interaction Log, a school system created to keep records of all parent-school interactions throughout a school year. Parents can request copies of their interactions with the school at any time. Teachers also receive reports monthly in order to analyze data and look for patterns in their interactions with parents. Please consider this answer for the question below as well (answer to question 2). Access to spreadsheets and parent-school interaction reports: Ms. Medina and Ryan Cannata. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Understanding the importance of parental involvement for a school in order to be successful, we have designated a full time position for a Parent Coordinator. This person will be responsible for working closely with school staff, school leadership team, parent associations, and community groups to engage families and involve them in school community. In PS/MS 161, we design family involvement programs/activities to help families participate more effectively in improving their children’s learning. For example, twice a year we conduct Family Math Game Nights for grades 3-8. The goal is to model parent how they 04  can support their children in the application of math skills through games. Additionally, this year we implemented “Parent Institute Workshops” based on parent interests. These institutes are conducted in two cycles: Fall and Spring. There are three different workshops within each cycle. Each workshop is presented by school coaches/specialists and ends with a culminating activity and feedback. Moreover, in PS/MS 161, we also coordinate and facilitate the development of activities geared to reach families who are underrepresented because of social-economic, racial, and/or language barriers (parents of ELLs). For instance, in our school we sponsor family outings at least three times a year in which parents, students, and staff work on creating a stronger school community. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Paste response here: 05 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Pamela Price Haynes, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 06  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: Don Pedro Albizu Campos School DBN: 05M161 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Pamela Price Title Principal Nazda Palchik-Medina Assistant Principal Kariem Williams Parent Coordinator Jusy Soto-Solivan ENL/Bilingual Teacher Maria Kelly Parent Milton Polo/Math & Science Teacher/Subject Area Teacher/Subject Area Ryan Cannata Madeline Block Coach Coach Nelson Fernandez School Counselor Gale Reeves Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 10/30/15 10/30/15 10/30/15 10/30/15 10/30/15 10/30/15 10/30/15 10/30/15 10/30/15 10/30/15 10/30/15 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 07  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 0 School Name: PS/MS 161 Superintendent: Gale Reeves The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No (*Primary) * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. In order to assess language preferences of our parents, we distribute a parent survey at the beginning of the school year. We also collect data from the Home Language Identification Survey, ATS reports, and emergency contact cards. Most of our parents have indicated Spanish as their preferred language. Most of our Arabic speaking students have at least one parent that speaks English at home. Some parents have indicated French as their preferred language as well. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. 08 Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Language The preferred languages spoken and written by our parents is English, Spanish and Arabic. 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. The following are the various written documents we disseminate to parents each year: annual handbooks, annual state testing dates, monthly calendars, monthly newsletters, bi-weekly memos, bi-weekly notices, and bi-weekly letters. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide Our school have several formal face-to-face parent meetings, such as parent-teacher conferences four times a year, curriculum nights twice a year, every Tuesday afternoon parent-teacher conference, and daily interpretation service(s)? 09  parent meetings with the school's parent coordinator as well as the school's guidance counselors. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) We will ensue that our Parent Coordinator along the assistance of the pta continue to make the following available to parents : Welcome Poster, Parents' Bill of Rights, Parents' Guide to Language Access as well as the Language ID Guide at the security desk and in the main office. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? Our school will gather feedback from parents on the quality and availability of our services in the following ways: Through our parent surveys, the pta meetings, as well as the parent-teacher conferences. 10 
