 02M575 School Name: MANHATTAN COMPREHENSIVE NIGHT AND DAY HIGH SCHOOL Principal: MICHAEL TOISE 2018-19 CEP-CS 1  Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC)   School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: 310200011575 10, 11, 12 240 Second Avenue 212.353.2010 Section 1: School Information Page School Information Manhattan Comprehensive Night and Day High School School Number (DBN): 02M575 212.353.1673 Fax: Phone Number: Michael Toise mtoise@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Michael Toise Email Address: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Geraldo Maldonado Jaime Hungria Michael Toise Larissa Lakouetene Malak Shuja Margaret Aylward Geographical District: 2 Superintendent’s Office Address: District Information Paul Rotondo Superintendent: 198 Forsyth Street protondo@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: (646) 654-1261 Phone Number: Fax: Field Support Center (FSC)   Manhattan (Districts 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6) FSC: Executive Director’s Office Address: Yuet Chu Executive Director: 333 7 th Avenue YChu@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 917-705-5856 Phone Number: 718-923-5146 Fax:   Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Michael Toise GeraldoMaldonado Jaime Hungria Alex Hwang Larissa Lakouetene Ruiz Madrigal Anna Malak Shuja TBD Moussa Mbengue Baboucar Mboob Genet Casimir *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative Alternate Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent   Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Windsor Tastaca SashaShlyamberg Margaret Aylward Member/ Teacher Member/ Teacher CBOMember Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/   Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with   the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement   Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Mission and Vision Section 4: CEP Overview MCNDHS was founded to provided older under-credited students with the opportunity to complete high school.   2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. Manhattan Comprehensive Night and Day High School (MCNDHS) is a public high school akin to the immigrant schools in New York City at the turn of the 20th century. Like those schools, it was founded to accommodate a new generation of students with different lifestyles and economic pressures. We are an academic community committed to educating older students with adult responsibilities. We service the educational needs of students ages 17-21 from 08:00 a.m. to 9:35 p.m. Monday through Friday. Our unique hours provide students who work or raise families the opportunity to create an academic schedule that dovetails with their adult responsibilities. We have an open admissions policy and enroll students throughout the year. Our goal is to graduate students who are prepared for college and begin their post-secondary career. The school has grown from 25 students at its founding in 1989 to over 750 today. Approximately 35% of our students are black, 45% Latino, 10% Asian and 5% Caucasian. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. Our program is designed to support students who have been discharged from other NYC high schools and older, foreign-born students with limited English proficiency. About 60% are recent immigrants representing over 50 countries from Asia, Africa, the Caribbean and Latin America, the Middle East and Eastern Europe. While the school draws students from all parts of the city, its population comes largely from economically disadvantaged areas, such as Bedford-Stuyvesant, Harlem, the Lower East Side, and the South Bronx. Our older, high school transfer students have typically dropped out from other schools or needed to leave those schools for a variety of reasons. Many of them have dropped out from more than one high school prior to their admission to our school. Both ethnically and linguistically we serve a diverse community. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. Over the past several years our school has made great strides in realizing the six components which compromise the Framework for Great Schools. Our instructional program focuses on the improvement of student literacy across the curriculum. We achieve this by implementing the Common Core Learning Standards and the Regents curricula in the content areas, a freestanding ESL program, and bilingual programs for our Chinese and Hispanic students, Advanced Placement courses in mathematics, English Language Arts (ELA), science and history and a Least Restrictive Environment (LRE) School Team Plan for our new continuum students. In order to ensure that students receive the appropriate services they need to succeed, we engage in constant monitoring of attendance and academic performance, and in providing appropriate academic and social intervention. Intervention may take the form of counseling, parent-teacher-student conferences, supplementary instruction, group and individual tutorials, and the provision of social welfare supports such as medical, housing, legal, and employment assistance. We continue to focus on improving our metrics across the entire spectrum of the Framework, especially our ability to provide access to rigorous curriculum to all students. 0  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 02M575 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 09,10,11,12 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 722 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 4 6 4 4 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 63 51 2 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 93.0% % Attendance Rate 87.8% % Reduced Lunch 52.6% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.7% 40.0% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 6.0% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 9.26 0% 13% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation 41% 18% 11.4% 1.2% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A NO N/A N/A NO Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A NO N/A N/A NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A NO N/A N/A NO No N/A 24 22 2 74.3% 5.0% 7.5% 29.9% 22.7% 1.4% 6 13% 6.1 N/A N/A 67% 27% 38.2% 17% N/A No No N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A NO NO N/A NO NO NO NO N/A NO NO NO NO N/A NO NO 1  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. After a review of our student performance data on the state Regents exams and our enrollment statistics which indicates an increasing population of special education students our school will focus on developing Specially Designed Instruction to improve the Regents pass rate of all students. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. We will focus our professional learning throughout the year to build understanding and implement Specially Designed Instruction to support all students across the curriculum in order to increase students performance on the state Regents exams by 5 points in January and June. 2  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? School leadership will continue to develop a schoolwide plan for building staff capacity to understand and implement Specially Designed Instruction to support all students in learning. School Leadership Professional Learning focused on integrating the concepts of Specially Designed Instruction across the curriculum. -All Staff members will attend 4 1/2-day workshops focused on understanding the concepts behind ICT and Specially Designed Instruction. -Teacher teams will work to integrate these practices into their content area curriculum. ELA, ENL, Social Studies, Math and Science Teachers -Teachers will be supported through twice monthly followed visits. 7/1 – 9/4 Michael Toise Kris Erickson Raquel Hernandez 9/8 – 6/26 Michael Toise Kris Erickson Irene Lau Raquel Hernandez Mark Testa Parent Workshops on Specially Designed Instruction Parents 9/8 – 6/26 Gisell Martinez, -Parents will be introduced to the fundamentals concepts of Specially Designed Instruction at Parent Association meetings through out the year. Michael Toise 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Parents and guardians will be invited to our Curriculum Night presentations to support them in working with their students. Curriculum Night in September, November, March and May. Key personnel - Principal, Assistant Principals and Parent Coordinator 3  Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. ● Superintendent Support ● Scheduled Professional Learning Time Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. ● Review of student data from January 2019 Regents exams. ● Final review of student data from June 2019 Regents exams. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.)  Regents Exams in January and June across all subjects. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 4  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? Our school will continue to work on creating a safe and supportive learning environment for all learners in which all students are challenged as learners. This includes working to support the inclusion of all groups in our advanced level course work. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Our school will continue to work with Equal Opportunity Schools as a partner in their Lead Higher program to develop and implement schoolwide and classroom practices to increase the inclusion of underrepresented groups in our advanced level course work by 10%. 5  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Continue our work with Equal Opportunity Schools (EOS) as a partner in their Lead Higher program to develop an outreach and support plan for students in advanced courses during the 2018-19 school year. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Administration 7/1 – 9/8 Principal Assistant Principal of Guidance Conduct EOS Student Surveys. Students 11/1-12/15 Principal Ongoing professional learning for Advanced Placement teachers to develop schoolwide and classroom practices to support under-represented students in the classroom. Review survey results and develop a guidance outreach plan. Guidance Counselors 3/1-3/31 Assistant Principal of Guidance Teachers 9/4-6/30 Principal Assistant Principal of Guidance Assistant Principal of Guidance Guidance Counselors Develop and implement a plan for celebrating student successes. Students 9/1-6/30 Principal Assistant Principal of Guidance 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Parents and guardians will be invited to our Curriculum Night presentations to support them in working with their students around academic and social-emotional supports. Curriculum Night in September, November, March and May. Key personnel - Principal, Assistant Principals and Parent Coordinator Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment 6  Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Allocation of Professional Learning Time Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. January 30 - End of semester review of program participation. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. -School Environment Survey Data -Equal Opportunity Schools (EOS) Advanced Placement participation data Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 7  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Based on an the School Environment Survey, collaborative Teachers, Opportunity to work with teachers from other schools = 62%, and anecdotal reports it was identified that as a school we need to provide greater opportunities for teachers to collaborate and better support the professional learning of all teachers. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Our school will participate in the Learning Partners Program (LPP) during the 2018-19 academic school year to increase the level of opportunities for collaborating between teachers across schools. The impact of this collaboration will be measured by survey results in the School Environment Survey by June 2019. 8  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Re-Apply for Learning Partners Program (LPP) Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Principal and Assistant Principals Spring 2019 Michael Toise, Principal Kris Erickson, Assistant Principal Model Teachers re-apply for the LPP program. Teachers Spring 2019 Michael Toise, Principal Kris Erickson, Assistant Principal LPP Model Teacher site visits Model Teachers September Michael Toise, Principal LPP Model Teacher site visits Model Teachers October Model Teachers Michael Toise, Principal Model Teachers LPP Model Teacher site visits LPP Staff Report at Chancellors Conference Day, 11/7 Model Teachers November Michael Toise, Principal Monthly LPP Model Teacher site visits Dec - May Model Teachers Dec-May Model Teachers Michael Toise, Principal Model Teachers 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Parents and guardians will be invited to our Curriculum Night presentations and School Leadership Team meetings to keep them informed about our work as a Learning Partner school. 9  Curriculum Night in September, November, March and May. Monthly School Leadership Team meetings. Key personnel - Principal, Assistant Principals and Parent Coordinator Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. LPP funds will be used to support the addition of the third LPP Model Teacher team member. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. -Learning Partner MId-Year Survey -Completion of 5 intervistations -Completion of 2 rounds of Lesson Study - Participation in 4 LPP Leadership Professional Learning Seminars -2 Staff members have participated in 3 Equity Leader Lab Activities Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. -Relevant Questions on the School Environment Survey -4E on Danielson Observation Rubric Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 0  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Based on assessment of the organizational needs of our school our School Leadership Team has determined the need for Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. In order to continue to build leadership capacity among our teaching faculty we will continue to develop our professional learning communities and integrate them into our overall professional learning plan. 100% of our pedagogical staff will be participating in learning communities by June 2019. 1  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Conduct schoolwide needs analysis for additional leadership capacity. Conduct teacher led focus groups to determine professional learning topics for the fall semester. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? School Leadership Team, Faculty Teachers Fall 2018 Principal, Assistant Principals September 5. Principal, Assistant Principals Teachers Teacher affiliation with a professional learning community (PLC's) Teachers September Teachers PLC team meetings. PLC presentations. Conduct teacher led focus groups to determine professional learning topics for the spring semester. Teacher affiliation with a professional learning community (PLC's) Teachers Teachers September - January November 6. Teachers Teachers Teachers January 28. Teachers Teachers February Teachers PLC Presentations Teachers June 6 Teachers 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Parents and guardians will be invited to our Curriculum Night presentations and Parent-Teacher conferences at which time they will have the opportunity to meet and work with our PLC teacher teams. Curriculum Night in September, November, March and May. Key personnel - Teachers Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment 2  Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc.  Professional Learning Time Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. PLC presentations. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. School Environment Survey questions pertaining to leadership and trust. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 3  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Our student demographics reflect our older population of students who often have adult responsibilities. In order to better support these students we have re-applied with a 21st Century Community Schools Grant. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. We will continue work with our CBO to effectively implement our 21st Century Community Schools Grant to fill 100% of our grant requirements by June 2019 . 4  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Plan for and collaborate around grant writing proposal for a 21st Century Community Schools Grant. 21st Century Grant Spring 2018 Principal School Leadership and CBO Spring - Summer 2019 Stuents Fall 2018- Spring 2019 CBO Director Principal CBO Director Principal Assistant Principals CBO Director Initial Planning Proposals 21st Century Program Implementation Push-in Resident Artists Clubs 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. Parents and guardians will be invited to our Curriculum Night presentations and Parent-Teacher conferences at which time they will have the opportunity to meet and work with our new assistant principal of guidance. Curriculum Night in September, November, March and May. Key personnel - Principal, Assistant Principals and Parent Coordinator Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 21st Century Grant money Assistant Principal of Guidance Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy Title I SWP Title I TA Title II, Part A Title III, Part A X Title III, Immigrant 5  C4E X 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Community Schools Service Report Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. LTW Program Report Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 6  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Diagnostic exams Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Foundational literacy Tutoring Before school day Departmental benchmark exams Domain specific literacy Regents Exams Close reading One-to-one After school day Group Push-in Saturdays Tutoring Before school day One-to-one After school day Structured and scaffolded writing Visual and graphic depictions of problems Student think alouds Group Formative assessment data provided to students Push-in Saturdays Peer-assisted learning activities. Discipline specific literacy instruction Tutoring Before school day One-to-one After school day Mathematics Classroom grades Teacher recommendations Diagnostic exams Departmental benchmark exams Regents Exams Classroom grades Teacher recommendations Science Uniform departmental exams Regents Exams Visual aids Classroom grades Peer-assisted learning activities Group Teacher recommendations Push-in Saturdays 7  Social Studies Uniform departmental exams Discipline specific literacy instruction Tutoring Before school day One-to-one After school day Group Push-in Saturdays One-to-one During school day At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Regents Exams Visual aids Classroom grades Scaffolded writing Teacher recommendations Peer-assisted learning activities Uniform departmental exams Individual counseling Speech therapy Executive function training Regents Exams Classroom grades Teacher recommendations 8  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 25 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. -Weekly Guidance Check-Ins to establish level of needed support -Title 1 Student Support Packages -Referrals to Social Service Agencies Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). Not Applicable 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 9  Not Applicable 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. Not Applicable 0  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. ● Recruitment of HQT from DoE New Teacher Finder ● Support through new teacher mentoring program in compliance with DoE regulations ● Ongoing weekly professional learning as provided for by DoE 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). ● School will implement a collaborative inquiry model that supports teachers’ professional learning and continuous improvement by completing collaborative inquiry cycles built around ● Modeling ● Collaborative planning ● Feedback/Tuning protocol Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program 1  Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. Teachers participate in the development of uniform departmental exams and diagnostic assessments. These exams are revised each semester. Teachers participate in departmental analysis and review of assessment data on conference days and in individual conferences with departments assistant principals. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Column B Verify with an (X) Section Reference(s) X Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Federal Federal 420,378.00 0 2  Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Local 40,316.00 0 5,025,481.00 X X 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the 3  participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 4  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. Manhattan Comprehensive Night and Day High School, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students Manhattan Comprehensive Night and Day High School will support parents and families of Title I students by: ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; 5  ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; The school’s Parent Involvement Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; 6  ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) Template School-Parent Compact (SPC) Manhattan Comprehensive Night and Day High School, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and 7  support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; 8  ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; 9  II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; III. Student Responsibilities 0  ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 1  Addendum: Community School Partnerships Directions: The Community School (CS) strategy is directly aligned to the Framework for Great Schools. Community Schools bring schools and community partners together and integrate academics, health, youth development, and family engagement to provide students with the tools and opportunities they need to succeed. The Core Services in Community Schools are Expanded Learning Time (ELT), Attendance Supports, Family Engagement, and Health & Wellness. Part 1 – Community School Partnerships Goal(s) How is the CS strategy integrated into academic instruction at your school, and what impact has it had on student academic outcomes? Expanded Learning Time will focus on improving literacy, social-emotional development and college and career exploration.  Programs such as Princeton SAT Review and Ivy Corps will provide opportunities for students to have greater choices for college.  The Cooper Union Stem Programming during Spring, Summer and Fall semesters and the summer Borough of Manhattan Community College Robotics program will expose students to stem careers.  College Now opportunities at LaGuardia Community College throughout the year prepare students for the post graduation success.  Peer Group Tutoring engages students , builds confidence and competencies and impacts grades and  graduation rates. Individual Tutoring not only improves literacy but exposes students to cross cultural, cross generational mentoring experiences that not only helps them academically but also helps them make the transition into life in the US and helps prepare them for the transition into life after high school. Individual Counseling will help student remove barriers to graduation and work on attendance issues   College advisement will assist students in applying for college  Career Advising will help students explore post graduation options    Advisory Classes will help students with their social emotional issues Financial Aid advising will assist students in applying for FAFSA and scholarships Financial Literacy workshops will help students understanding of budgeting and college loans Will increase SAT scores, college acceptances, more students on track for graduation. Indicate the summative goal(s) of the Community School for the 2018-19 school year. Be sure to construct the goal to be SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Realistic, and Time-bound. By June 2019 1. Our Expanded Learning Time programs will increase credit accumulation as measured in the School Quality Report by 1 credit across all sub-groups 1. 0 - 11 credits, 6.84 -> 7.84, 2. 11 - 22 credits, 7.83->8.83, 3. 22 - 33 credits, 7.72->8.72 4. 33 - 38 credits. 8.46->9.46 2. Our Attendance Supports programs will increase our daily attendance percentage by 5% from 2017-18 rate of 72% based on the ATS-RPAR attendance report. 2 3. Our Family Engagement programs will increase our overall score on the School Environment Survey “Strong Family-Community Ties” by 1 point from 3.60 to 4.00. 4. Health & Wellness will increase our overall score on the School Environment Survey “Supportive Environment ” by 1 point from 3.83 to 4.83. Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Community School Annual Goal(s): How will achieving your Community School Goal(s)--in Expanded Learning Time (ELT), Attendance Supports, Family Engagement, and Health & Wellness--support your academic goals for students? An integrated, intensive whole school model of services will impact the school community . By creating a social emotional learning community all students are supported in a way that will allow them to accumulate credits, pass their classes and ultimately graduate and go on to successful college and careers. Part 2 – Community School Partnerships Core Services Action Plan Part 2a. Identify the Community-based Organization (CBO) partnerships that you will develop in ELT, Attendance Supports, Family Engagement, and Health & Wellness, their target student population(s), and scope of the services provided. As well as supporting schools’ supportive environment and attendance work, CBOs should be helping to support your school’s instructional focus. Scope of Service SY18-19 SMART Goal Target Population Students with attendance below 80%. Overage under-credits students enrolled in Algebra classes. Collaborative attendance teams (CBO/Guidance) will create and implement an attendance improvement plan for home room students with the goal of increasing overall attendance. Tutors in Class CBO Partnership CDI CDI Urban Arts CDI Urban Arts By June 2019 increase school attendance by 3%. By June 2019 increase overall pass rates and credit accumulation. [Data to be updated.] By June 2019 increase overall pass rates and credit accumulation. Overage under-credits students enrolled in U.S. History classes. Fresh Prep classroom enrichment - 80 sessions in two classes. Overage under-credits students. Volunteers and Peer Tutors By June 2019 increase overall pass rates and credit accumulation. Overage under-credits students enrolled in Dance [Data to be updated.] By June 2019 increase school attendance by 3%. 3  Young Audiences EnAct EnAct CDI Physical Education Overage under-credits students. Literature to Life Program Overage under-credits students. Social-Emotional Learning Workshop By June 2019 increase overall pass rates and credit accumulation. [Data to be updated.] By June 2019 raise student response scores on the School Environment Survey. Students with children Parenting Workshop By June 2019 raise student response scores on the School Environment Survey Students and families Legal Information By June 2019 raise student response scores on the School Environment Survey Part 3 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 3a. Indicate resources your Community Partnership will leverage to achieve your summative SMART goal(s) and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Budget lines from multiple funding sources - tax levy, Title SWP, 21st Century, Title III - will be used to support a comprehensive wrap around delivery of services. Part 3b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) Title I SWP Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside X 21st Century SIG Grant School Achievement Funding C4E Other 2. Part 3c. Describe how the school will partner with the Lead CBO to do the following: 1. Community Schools are expected to partner with a community-based partner organization (CBO) and together with members of the School Leadership Team, hire a Community School Director. The Director will lead implementation of the asset and needs assessment process, and other critically important coordinating activities. Indicate how you will leverage this aspect of the work. Community Schools are expected to personalize the needs of all students, through strategic programming and services, as determined by the asset and needs assessment, and must also offer Expanded Learning Time (ELT) and mental health programming. In completing this section, ensure that you think about how: (1) the right services are provided to the right students and families at the right time; and (2) how you will seamlessly coordinate services with instructional programming happening throughout and outside of the school day. Indicate how you will implement this work, and describe other programming you anticipate to be in place to strengthen this initiative. 4  3. 4. Community Schools are expected to emerge as Partnership Schools, which are places where parents and families feel welcome, actively participate in the conversation and decision-making around the renewal of their schools, and have many opportunities to advocate for their children. Monthly meetings and Community School Forums engaging families and community stakeholders will be a critical part of this family engagement strategy. Describe how you will implement this aspect of the work. Community School Principals are expected to meet on a weekly basis with their Community School Director, select Assistant Principals, key staff, and other CBOs, to analyze trends in data and case manage individual students. Data tools – including the New Visions Data Sorter - and training will be available for schools to use. Indicate how you will implement this aspect of the work. Manhattan Comprehensive Night and Day High School will work with Comprehensive Development, Inc and the School Community Director (SCD) in implementing and coordinating activities that improve student achievement, attendance and school environment. The ELT, After School and Saturday programs will be tailored based on students’ needs, and choice. The ELT program will be embedded during the student's’ school program. In addition, each student will have the opportunity to receive additional instructional programming after school and on Saturdays Parents are welcomed to attend our SLT meetings, parent teacher conferences, Ind. parent meetings or request a meeting with school administration. Our community school forum reflects on the accomplishments of the past year, and an overview of our direction for next year. Parents were given a detailed survey so school administration can include their input in planning for the following year. CSD will meet with school administration in the weekly Cabinet meeting and will meet on an individual basis with APs . CSD is a part of the attendance meetings and is involved with using the Data Sorter to assist in action plans for students. Part 4 – Community School Partnerships Oversight Part 4a. Key Staff and Partners 1. Name and describe the scope of involvement of all community partners working in the school (include partners supporting ELT, counseling, enrichment, etc.) 2. Name the members of your Community School Team and how meetings will be organized and structured to engage all stakeholders and be focused on results. 3. Explain data strategies including the use of the data sorter, and steps that the school will take to ensure that the appropriate interventions are provided to the right students Attendance, Literacy ,College and Career and SEL will be the area of focus for the CSD Community partners such as CDI, Urban Arts, Young Audiences, EnAct will assist in our success. Part 4b. Indicate resources needed including human resources, instructional resources, and schedule adjustments to implement the Community School program. 5  Collaboration with the guidance team, support staff, and other CBO organizations. Part 4c. Timeline for implementation and completion, including start and end dates. July 2018-June 2019 Part 4d. Mental Health Work Plan Separate from this S/CEP, schools will complete a Mental Health Work Plan that will become an addendum to this document. 6 Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components: 1. 2. 3. The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers. Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. 1. 2. 3. 4. High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” 1. Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences. Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. 1. These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 7  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the · · · · · · rationale subgroups and grade levels of students to be served schedule and duration language of instruction # and types of certified teachers types of materials Begin description here: Rationale: The rationale for our program is to provide supplemental direct instruction to support and enhance the learning of our ELL population. Of our population of 752 students, approximately 50% are English Language Learners and our students come from 50+ countries. In order to meet the English language needs of this varied population who can only stay with us for an average of four semesters, we have a Free Standing ESL Program. This is an Intensive ESL Program designed to fast-track students from interpersonal communicative skills to cognitive academic language proficiency. There are currently six levels of ESL: (1) Entering, (2) Beginning Emerging, (3) Intermediate Emerging, (4) Transitioning, (5) Expanding; and (6) Commanding/Transitional. The direct instruction programs listed below will support language development, English instruction, academic achievement in core academic areas. Students will have access to content specific bilingual glossaries. Teachers also have bilingual ability in Spanish, Korean and French. Subgroups: The subgroup that we are targeting for these supplemental programs are: Level 1, Level 2, Level 3, Level 4 students (entering, emerging, transitioning, expanding, and commanding groups) with a particular emphasis on the most recent newcomers to NY, and Level 5 students (expanding students). These supplemental programs will serve approximately 250 English Language Learners, ranging from grades 10, 11, and 12 at our school. Teachers recommended these students for supplemental support based on class performance, diagnostic and periodic assessments, and results from Regents exams. Program #1: Supplemental Content Support for ELLs (Entering, Emerging, Transitioning, Expanding, and Commanding students). Targeted Content Areas: English, Science (Earth Science, Living Environment, Chemistry, History: Global, U.S. History). Approximately 15 - 25 students in each content area session. Schedule and Duration: SATURDAY ACADEMY: Fall 2018, Spring 2019 (12 sessions for 4 hours in each content area) LOI: English # and types of certified teachers: 7 Teachers: (4) dually certified Science and TESOL teachers, (3) dually certified English Language Arts and TESOL teachers. Types of Materials: School based curriculum (materials will be supplemental material designed to support gaps in students' content knowledge). Materials for this program will be purchased 8  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information with Title III funds. Digital subscriptions to MYNGCONNECT and NEWSELA. Also purchase of Delta Math. Description: This program is designed as content area support for all proficiency levels of ELLs (Entering, Emerging, Transitioning, Expanding, and Commanding students). For some students, this will provide on-going enrichment support, for others this will integrate some test preparation for Regents exams in Living Environment, Earth Science, Chemistry, and English. Students will practice concepts and review concepts in content areas. Topics covered in Global History: Neolithic Rev/Early River Valleys, Classical Civilizations, Belief Systems (Religions & Philosophies), Turning Points (Crusades, Renaissance, Scientific Revolution, Enlightenment), Economic Systems & Trade Networks, (Barter, Manorialism, Commercial, Capitalism, Command, Mixed), (Silk Road, Hanseatic League, Trans-Sahara, Transatlantic, Triangular Trade, Globalization), Middle East Conflicts (1947-Present day), Genocides, (Armenian, Holocaust, Cambodia, Rwanda, Bosnia) The Cold War, Domestic Policies(1960s-1990s), Post Cold War Presidencies (1990s -2010s), Civil Right Movement, US Constitution & Bill of Rights, Supreme Court Decisions Scientific Method, Ecology: Human Impact: Energy, Matter & Organization: Homeostasis: Reproduction, Growth, and Development: DNA, Protein Synthesis, Gene Action, Biotechnology, Evolution, Diffusion, Making Connections, Biodiversity, Beaks of Finches Topics covered in Earth Science: Measuring the Earth, Insolation and Seasons, Weather, Water and Climate, Weathering and Erosion, Deposition, Rocks and Minerals, Earth's Crust and Interior, Geologic History, Landscape Development, Earth in the Universe, Motions of Earth, Moon, and Sun, Energy in Earth's Process. Topics covered in Chemistry: Atomic Concept & Classification of Matter, Nuclear Chemistry, Periodic Table, Formulas & Equations, Chemical Bonding, Organic Chemistry Physical Behavior of Matter, Property of Solutions, The Mathematics of Formula & Equations, Kinetics & Equilibrium, Oxidation & Reduction, Acids, Bases, and Salts Topics covered in ELA: Direct instruction (structured overview, explicit teaching, mastery lecture, drill and practice, compare and contrast, didactic questions, demonstrations, guided reading, listening, viewing). Indirect instruction (problem solving, case studies, inquiry, reading for meaning, reflective discussion, concept formation, concept mapping, concept attainment, close reading). These students will be evaluated pre and post essays in the following areas: Meaning, Development, Organization, Language Use, Conventions Program #2: Supplemental Content Support for ELLs (Entering, Emerging, Transitioning, Expanding, and Commanding students). Targeted Content Areas: English, Science, History, Math. Approximately 15 - 25 students in each content area session. Schedule and Duration: AFTER SCHOOL PROGRAM: Fall 2018, Spring 2019 (50 SESSIONS, 100 minutes a day, Wednesday, Thursday 2:20pm to 4:20pm) LOI: English 9  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information # and types of certified teachers: 3 Teachers: (2) dually certified Science and TESOL teachers, (1) dually certified Math and TESOL teacher, (1) dually certified History and TESOL teacher Types of Materials: School based curriculum (materials will be supplemental material designed to support gaps in students' content knowledge). Materials for this program will be purchased with Title III funds. Topics covered in Math: Functions, expressions, equations relationships between quantities and reasoning with equations and their graphs, linear and exponential functions, quadratic expressions, equations and functions, synthesis of modeling with equations and functions, descriptive statistics and inequalities Topics covered in Global History: Neolithic Rev/Early River Valleys, Classical Civilizations, Belief Systems (Religions & Philosophies), Turning Points (Crusades, Renaissance, Scientific Revolution, Enlightenment), Economic Systems & Trade Networks, (Barter, Manorialism, Commercial, Capitalism, Command, Mixed), (Silk Road, Hanseatic League, Trans-Sahara, Transatlantic, Triangular Trade, Globalization), Middle East Conflicts(1947-Present day), Genocides, (Armenian, Holocaust, Cambodia, Rwanda, Bosnia) The Cold War, Domestic Policies(1960s-1990s), Post Cold War Presidencies (1990s -2010s), Civil Right Movement, US Constitution & Bill of Rights, Supreme Court Decisions Program #3: Supplemental direct instruction to complement core ESL courses and services Schedule and Duration: AFTER SCHOOL: Fall 2018, Spring 2019 (60 Sessions, Twice a week, 90 minutes each session). Approximately 15 - 25 students in each content area session. LOI: English # and types of certified teachers: 2 Teachers: (2) dually certified English Language Arts and TESOL teachers Description: This program provides supplemental direct instruction to support our school's entering, emerging, transitioning, expanding and commanding ELL students. Our Entering and Emerging students will receive additional support in language acquisition, speaking and listening practice, and reading/writing instruction. This will serve 25% of our 50% of English Language Learners. This supplemental program will provide students with the opportunities to practice their speaking and listening in real-life settings and situations. Direct instruction (structured overview, explicit teaching, mastery lecture, drill and practice, compare and contrast, didactic questions, demonstrations, guided reading, listening, viewing). Indirect instruction (problem solving, case studies, inquiry, reading for meaning, reflective discussion, concept formation, concept mapping, concept attainment, close reading). These students will be evaluated pre and post Supplemental Instructional Activity on Regents Exams essays (thematic, document based question). Program #4: Supplemental direct instruction to complement core ESL courses and services for students in College Now (students at expanding and commanding levels). Approximately 15 - 25 students in each content area session. This program is NOT funded by any Title III funds 0  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Schedule and Duration: BEFORE SCHOOL PROGRAM: Fall 2018 and Spring 2019 ( 20 SESSIONS, 1 PERIOD A DAY, Monday to Friday) LOI: English # and types of certified teachers: 1 Teacher: 1 dually certified English Language Arts and TESOL teachers Types of Materials: College Now Curriculum All of these programs will take place before school, after school and on Saturdays, which is above and beyond the mandated minutes of instruction for ELLs. Student progress notes, attendance records, assessments and student folders will be used for program documentation. Program #5: Supplemental direct instruction to complement core ESL courses and services for students in College Now (students at expanding and commanding levels). Approximately 15 - 25 students in each content area session. Schedule and Duration: BEFORE SCHOOL PROGRAM: Fall 2018 and Spring 2019 ( 20 SESSIONS, 1 PERIOD A DAY, Monday to Friday) LOI: English # and types of certified teachers: 1 Teacher: 1 dually certified English Language Arts and TESOL teachers Types of Materials: College Now Curriculum All of these programs will take place before school, after school and on Saturdays, which is above and beyond the mandated minutes of instruction for ELLs. Student progress notes, attendance records, assessments and student folders will be used for program documentation. rationale teachers to receive training schedule and duration topics to be covered name of provider Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. · · · · · Begin description here: Rationale: The rationale for our professional development this year is to provide teachers with the opportunity to familiarize and work with the newly introduced writing approach, The Writing Revolution. The Writing Revolution brings a proven, cost-effective and evidence-based instructional methodology to teach teachers how to provide expository writing instruction. The Writing Revolution’s program, the Hochman Method, enables students to master the most essential skills needed to produce coherent, unified, structured writing. In turn, these writing skills enable students to become better readers, to communicate more effectively and, most importantly, to elevate their critical thinking. The Hochman Method is aligned with the Common Core State Standards. At all grade levels and in every subject, it enables teachers and instructional leaders to teach students the skills needed to clearly express their ideas in writing. The method’s interlocking strategies bring about direct improvement not only in students’ writing - they also improve student outcomes globally. Students develop and refine their ability to select their words with precision and become skilled at prioritizing central ideas over peripheral ones. The effect of improving these important skills is cumulative. As student writing 1  highly customized teacher and leadership training, integration of expository writing in every subject in every grade, on-going consulting sessions, hands-on review of student work,&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; Part C: Professional Development improves, so does the students’ ability to think clearly and to speak in a way that reflects more complex thought. This, in turn, allows teachers to impart knowledge more effectively since students use writing and classroom discussion to review concepts, to learn or construct new knowledge, and to generate new networks of understanding. Students who are taught to write using this method have repeated and rigorous practice in manipulating the mechanics of language. As a consequence, their reading comprehension improves as they become more proficient at figuring out how to decipher the structure of written language. Schedule and duration: 5 Teachers: (1) dually certified Science and TESOL teacher, (4) dually certified ELA and TESOL teacher, (1) dually certified History and TESOL teacher. Teachers will have two hours week to collaborate, analyze student data trends and review student work. Teachers will submit work products every month that details growth in their ELL students (all proficiency levels: entering, emerging, transitioning, expanding, commanding). Topics to be covered: Title III teachers will receive monthly trainings for one period. Topics to be covered include how to implement the new writing approach and how to integrate this practice more effectively. After much research, in consultation with our colleagues at the Superintendent's Office, and other schools who have implemented the Writing Revolution/Hochman method, our school selected this provider. We believe by using an established provider such as The Writing Revolution, we will have more consistency and a standard approach to support the learning of our English Language Learner students. The method incorporates: · · · · &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp; · &nbsp; · to&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp; · &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp; highly customized teacher and leadership training, integration of expository writing in every subject in every grade, on-going consulting sessions, hands-on review of student work, site visits to monitor progress and identify areas for targeted support, and the identification of instructional leaders and teachers in order to develop the capacity to deliver comprehensive writing instruction. Day 1 • B.O.Y. TWR Free Write Paragraph Samples (9 target students per grade level using TWR- 3 high, 3 middle, & 3 low) Day 2 deliver comprehensive writing instruction. &nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; site visits to monitor progress and identify areas for targeted support, and&nbsp;&nbsp; the identification of instructional leaders and teachers in order to develop the capacity 2  Part C: Professional Development • TWR Sentence Strategies (may include sentences & fragments, scrambled sentences, sentence types, & conjunctions) • Note-taking activities • For students in their 2nd or 3rd year using TWR, samples can include sentence strategies, Quick Outline work, summaries, MPOs, etc.. Day 3 • TWR Sentence Strategies (may include sentences & fragments, scrambled sentences, sentence types, conjunctions, subordinating conjunctions & appositives) • Note-taking activities • Quick Outline work/ Part Activities • For students in their 2nd or 3rd year using TWR, samples can include sentence strategies, Quick Outline work, summaries, MPOs, etc.. Day 4 • TWR Sentence Strategies (may include sentences & fragments, scrambled sentences, sentence types, conjunctions, subordinating conjunctions, appositives, sentence combining & sentence expansion) • Note-taking activities • Quick Outline work/ Part Activities • For students in their 2nd or 3rd year using TWR, samples can include sentence strategies, Quick Outline work, summaries, MPOs, etc.. Day 5 • M.O Y. TWR Free Write Paragraph Samples (the same 9 target students per grade level that were submitted in September) rationale schedule and duration topics to be covered name of provider how parents will be notified of these activities Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. · · · · · Begin description here: Rationale: Of our population of 752 students, approximately 48% are English Language Learners and our students come from 50+ countries. Because of this wide range of languages spoken at home, it is imperative that we develop parent engagement activities that can impact higher achievement for ELLs. Because families come from different backgrounds, the NYC school system and regulations may differ from theirs back home. We aim to provide families with an 3  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities understanding of graduation requirements are, how our ELL program is structured, and help parents understand how to prepare for post-secondary plans. Schedule and duration: We aim to host a workshop at least once a month as well as send home a parent newsletter. 9/26/2018 - Curriculum Night for Parents of ELLs (Supplemental event for parents of ELLs), Provided by Assistant Principal of ENL/ELA 11/30/2018 - two hour ESL parent workshops to cover post-graduation plans provided by Assistant Principal of ENL/ELA 03/22/2019 - two hour ESL parent workshops to cover curriculum provided by Assistant Principal of ENL/ELA Parents of Title III students will participate in these activities because we will have interpreters as well as translated documents. We host twice a academic school year (11/30/2018 and 03/22/2019) two hour ESL parent workshops with licensed ESL teachers and content area department chairs presenting our High-Quality Instructional Title III program. We provide a question and answer forum for parents at this time. More than 50 parents usually attend with translation offered in Spanish, Mandarin, Cantonese, and French. At these workshops, snacks are served, and copies of handouts are distributed to parents. In addition, we also provide on various dates: • Increased opportunities to serve with staff members on various school committees, such as School Leadership Team, Health Committees, Cultural Heritage Programs, LRE School Team, and the like • form a core group of parents based upon native languages to reach out to other parents, help in translations, help in explaining the school and its curriculum to them • organize meetings/seminars for parents on the New Standards, Regents exams, and graduation requirements • involve parents in the design and implementation of the proposed year-round school • organize parents to advocate for issues affecting the school in the city and state levels Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits) 1. 2. Purchased services 1. Per session Per diem High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. 4 Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. Supplies and materials 2. Must be supplemental. Additional curricula, instructional materials. Must be clearly listed. 3. 4. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL 5  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 02 School Name Manahttan Comprehensive Night and Day HS Borough Manhattan School Number 575 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Michael Toise Coach type here ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Laura Fleder Teacher/Subject Area Windsor Tastaca Teacher/Subject Area type here Related-Service Provider type here Superintendent Assistant Principal Irene Lau Coach type here School Counselor type here Parent type here Parent Coordinator Gisell Martinez Field Support Center Staff Member type here Other (Name and Title) type here C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 14 11 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 2 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 2 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 771 6 Total number of ELLs 439 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 56.94%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 1 4 K 0 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 3 0 2 0 5 0 6 0 7 0 8 0 9 0 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? Our school uses both department created assessments and an online lexile assessment from National Geographic's Cengage Learning to measure literacy skills. The department diagnostic and periodic assessments help measure student's ability to read and write. The reading and accompanying multiple choice question results are aligned to specific reading skills, and the writing provides insight into student's past experiences in grammar and sentence structure. These results allow us to effectively provide students with the support they need. Once a student is placed into an ESL class, teachers also administer the online lexile assessment to gather more specific data about student reading levels. We have six levels of ESL ESL 1 Entering ESL 2 Emerging Low ESL 3 Emerging High ESL 4 Transitioning 7  ESL 5 Expanding ESL 6 Commanding Initial determination of early proficiency levels is achieved through the LAB-R, our in-house reading comprehension and writing intake assessments, as well as any additional first week writing assessment to confirm proper placement of our ELL students. Our DYO periodic assessment given every semester, serves as our end of semester periodic assessment. We administer it three to four times a year in order to determine appropriate placement within two degrees of proficiency in each of our six levels of ESL. During the school year 2014 - 2015, our school adapted a new ELL curriculum (National Geographic EDGE) which is aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards. This new curriculum provides our 6 levels with a level of consistency in rigor and alignment to the Common Core Learning Standards. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? Our ESL department works together to ensure students are placed correctly. We meet bi-weekly, and will continuously examine student work as well as discuss student progress. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? We evaluate the success of our programs for ELL’s through many avenues, including meeting AYP, School Quality Reviews, Periodic Assessment promotion/pass rates. We met our state AYP 2014-15 in Math and ELA for ELL’s. The following are the findings of our most recent School Quality Review from May 1-2, 2012: "The review of documents, lesson observations, and interviews with school leaders and members of staff demonstrated to the review team that the school is integrating the new P ‐ 12 Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS) into its instructional plan by creating curriculum maps and projects based on the CCLS. These projects are specifically designed to meet the needs of all students, including ELLs. Teachers further differentiate these projects to address the needs of individual students. In addition, teachers encourage ELLs to refer to native language dictionaries, which are accessible in classrooms. There are limited amounts of other materials available in native languages that would increase student access to the curriculum and provide additional support for ELLs in raising their levels of achievement. Based on a document review, interviews and classroom observations, the review team found sufficient evidence that teachers support all students, including ELLs, by using school ‐ created, teacher made, and standardized assessments to differentiate instruction and create flexible groups in class. Teachers frequently help students understand how to improve their work by facilitating peer ‐ to ‐ peer discussions. Students review each other’s work, provide and receive both written and oral feedback on their class work from their peers, and have opportunities to improve their work based on peer feedback. Although the work that is displayed has some relevant and specific feedback, referencing a task ‐ specific rubric, there is little student work posted in most classrooms and hallways. This limits opportunities to provide students with actionable next steps to improve their work. As a result of these findings we have been posting more task specific rubrics and student work in classrooms and hallways. " We recently had a School Quality Review for the school year 2015 - 2016 where we earned a proficient in 1.1, 1.2 and well-developed in 2.2, 3.4, and 4.2. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? Once the summative data has been gathered, the department AP will disaggregate data so that the department can analyze for trends and patterns. Once this has been completed, then as an administrative team, we decide what next steps to implement to curriculum if needed. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] Paste response to question here: 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. 8  Based on the 2014 - 2015 NYSESLAT results, we noticed that a majority of our students performed at the entering, emerging, transitioning, and expanding levels. This accounted for 92.4% of the student population. Only 6% of our students performed at the commanding level. The distribution of the all of the performance levels are: Entering 22.41%, Emerging 25.43%, Transitioning 13.79%, and Expanding at 30.60%. These data patterns reveal that our students continue to need on-going English language acquisition support in both the ESL standalone classes, and integrated content support. Through the CR-ITI grant, we were able to give an additional 10 teachers/administrators the opportunity to receive an additional teaching certificate in ESOL. With this, we will be able to provide students with both standalone and additional integrated content support. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? Our department meets bi-weekly and continuously examine student work as well as discuss student progress. Teachers are also given the time to work in professional learning communities to update curriculum, make adjustments as needed. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. ELL instruction for ELLs is delivered via the Freestanding program at our school. We have a free standing self-contained ESL program in which students receive all instruction in English, with the addition of native language arts instruction in Chinese, Spanish and French. The number of ESL instruction units meet and exceed the NYS CR part 154 stipulations. We have six levels of English Proficiency (beginning, low intermediate, intermediate, advanced, and proficient - and we aligned the new NYSESLAT ). Students are grouped homogeneously together based on their English Proficiency only for their ENL courses. As a result of our parternship with Touro College, we recently added 8 additional content teachers who also provide integrated content area support to our students. According to the CR Part 154.2, our students receive stand alone ESL content and integrated ESL support. According to the CR Part 154.2, our students receive the following ENL minutes: Entering (Level 1) 675 minutes of ENL instruction per week (mandated: 540 minutes) Emerging Low (Level 2) 675 minutes of ENL instruction per week (mandated: 360 minutes) Emerging High (Level 3) 450 minutes of ENL instruction per week (mandated: 360 minutes) Expanding (Level 4) 450 minutes of ENL instruction per week (mandated: 180 minutes) Commanding (Level 5) 450 minutes of ENL instruction per week (mandated: 90 minutes) b. TBE program. If applicable. N/A c. DL program. If applicable. N/A 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? According to the new allocation of instructional minutes, we have explicit programming that ensures each English Proficiency level receives the minimum number of instructional minutes. Our beginners receive 540 minutes, our low intermediate students receive 360 minutes, our intermediate, advanced students receive 180 minutes, and our proficient 9  students receive at least 90 minutse of instruction each week. According to the CR Part 154.2, our students receive the following ENL minutes: Entering (Level 1) 675 minutes of ENL instruction per week (mandated: 540 minutes) Emerging Low (Level 2) 675 minutes of ENL instruction per week (mandated: 360 minutes) Emerging High (Level 3) 450 minutes of ENL instruction per week (mandated: 360 minutes) Expanding (Level 4) 450 minutes of ENL instruction per week (mandated: 180 minutes) Commanding (Level 5) 450 minutes of ENL instruction per week (mandated: 90 minutes) 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. Through intense and integrated collaboration between ENL and content teachers, instructional approaches used in ENL courses are also used in content area courses. With the assistance of the CR-ITI grant, nine additional teachers are currently enrolled in order to earn their additional certificate in TESOL certifiation. We regularly review our ENL and content curriculum to determine Common Core alignment. ELLs are programmed into content area courses based on their ESL level. ELLs in Levels 1 & 2 are are programmed for introductory history elective courses. These courses are designed to introduce ELLs to the skills they will be require to mas ter by the time they sit for history regents exams. The curriculum in these courses focus on vocabulary and reading comprehension using simplified historical texts. ELLs in Level 3 are programmed for a double period Global History 1 & 2 semester long course. ELLs in this course have access to McDougal Littell's "World History" textbook and the companion Study Guide. The guide provides ELLs a summary of the key ideas covered in the comprehensive textbook. To best meet the academic needs of their ELL, content area teachers use multiple instructional strategies. The strategies include the following : -> Think-Pair share brainstorming activities -> Graphic- Thinking organizers -> Vocabulary Word Walls -> Differentiated group work -> Visual aids (Power point presentations, posters, videos) -> Audio summary of every chapter -> Small Group Instruction -> Dual language dictionaries and glossaries ELLs in Level 4 are programmed for a double period Global History 3 & 4 semester long course. ELLs in this course also have access to McDougal Littell's "World History" textbook and its companion Study Guides. Since this course culminates in a regents exam, content area teachers administer in-class baseline assessments to gauge ELLs' level of proficiency in content and skills covered in the lower level history courses. They use the results to develop units/lesson plans that address the areas where ELLs require additional scaffolding and support. ELLs in Level 5 are programmed for a double period US History 1 & 2 semester long course and a single period US Government course. ELLs in this course have access to McDougal Littell's "The Americans" textbook and its companion Study Guide. Since this course culminates in a regents exam, content area teachers also administer in-class baseline assessments to gauge ELLs' level of proficiency in content and skills covered in the lower level history courses. They use the results to develop unit/lesson plans that address the areas where ELLs require additional scaffolding and support. In addition to the instructional strategies listed above, content area teachers of ELLs in Levels 4 and 5 place a greater emphasis on the skills need for regents exams in history. ELLs are provided differentiated materials for each of the skills listed below: -> Analyzing primary and secondary sources of varying levels of complexity -> Using maps, globes, charts, graphs, and other geographic tools to gather and interpret data and to draw conclusions -> Analyzing and interpreting political cartoons 0  -> Analyzing questions and sorting them into themes and tasks We currently employ a number of strategies to provide targeted intervention for our ELL math students. These include the use of in-class math tutors who, in concert with the individual math teacher, target specific ELL students during regularly scheduled Regents math class periods during both day and night classes. Included in this group of math tutors are individuals who speak Chinese, Spanish, and French. Peer math tutoring outside of regularly scheduled math classes is available for ELL students during period 10 and 11 in the Cafeteria from 3:52 – 5:31 pm. The peer tutors are ELL students who have successfully completed the math course for which they provide tutoring, and have been recommended by their math teacher. Another form of math intervention available to ELL students outside of regularly scheduled math classes is volunteer math tutoring. Volunteer tutoring is conducted by a combination of current and former math teachers, and other adults proficient in math, that have received training from Learning Leaders. Volunteer tutors meet with ELL students individually, or in pairs, before or after their school day, or during the students’ free period. ELL students may be assigned to attend peer or volunteer tutoring by their math teacher, or they may choose to attend on their own. Finally, ELL math students are encouraged by their math teacher to attend specially programmed math Regents review classes, taught by math teachers, scheduled on Fridays leading up to the Math Regents exams in January and June. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? We do not offer TBE or Dual Language program at this time, therefore, we do not evaluate ELLs' native language throughout the year . 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status a. Our SIFE students are particularly benefitted by our skills based curriculum and targeted materials for their level of abilit y. We use a variety of materials with these students, depending on the data produced from the various sources previously stated. These materials include: The Grammar in Context series by Sandra Elbaum, the English Grammar series by Betty Azar, the Penguin Reader series, which seems especially beneficial for differentiating toward our SIFE ELLs. All ESL teachers use laptop carts in the classroom and teachers have now incorporated the use of Smart Boards into the levels one and two curriculum for aiding visual learners identified as SIFE. Our 11 licensed ESL teachers provide the above said interventions/strategies during the core day program in their ESL classroom. We provide a lot of sustained emotional and social support for our SIFE students. Aditionally, we use our Title III funds in order to provide supplmentary support since SIFE students often need remediation. Our newcomer students get an additional 45 minutes each day to support their learning. Our developing and long term students receive at least 360 minutes a week of designated ENL instruction. b. The majority of our ELLs are newcomers, less than 3 years in US schools. These students have trended for the last three years to be placed in levels 1 and 2 ESL as the result of DYO periodic assessment. Our necomers students are particularly benefitted by our skills based curriculum and targeted materials for their level of ability. We use a variety of materials with these students, dep ending on the data produced from the various sources previously stated. These materials include: The National Geograhic EDGE curriculum, The Grammar in Context series by Sandra Elbaum, the English Grammar series by Betty Azar, the Penguin Reader series, which seems especially beneficial for differentiating toward our newcomers ELLs. All ESL teachers use laptop carts in the classroom and teachers have now incorporated the use of Smart Boards into the levels one and two curriculum for aiding visual learners identified as newcomers. Our 18 licensed ESL teachers provide the above said interventions/strategies during the core day program in their ESL classroom. c. The students who have been identified as receiving 4-6 years have trended to be placed in levels 3-6 ESL as the result of DYO periodic assessment. These students receive tutoring provided by our CBO, Comprehensive Development Inc. 1  d. Our 14 students who have been identified as receiving more than 6 years still struggle in their content area classes, especially with reading comprehension and writing skills. Our program provides them with the necessary services to be college and career ready, especially in our drive towards implementing the CCSS. As with our SIFE students these students are benefitted by our skills based curriculum and targeted materials for the level of ability. Content area teachers have regular meetings and work closely with our 11 ESL teachers to strategize on best practices in serving the ELL population in the content area. Some of the strategies they use with these st udents are: adapted texts, differentiated lessons, distinguishing between academic and content area vocabulary, and decoding in reading. e. ELLs who have reached proficiency on the NYSESLAT are continued ELL accommodations on all Regents Exams for two years. ELLs who have reached proficiency on the NYSESLAT are provided support services at MCNDHS in a number of ways. Students onsidered proficient are also invited to participate in our school’s Small Group Initiative, where teachers in small groups of no more than 5 students tutor them. The SGI groups meet twice a week, Mondays and Wednesdays, for the entire academic year. ELLs are given the flexibility to approach any teacher in any subject area they might be struggling in to request small group tutoring. ELLs who are proficient are also afforded extra tutoring services thr ough the school’s “Friday Regents Review.” These 2 ½ hour Regents prep courses are offered on 8 consecutive Saturdays prior to Regents exam week and are available in all subject areas including English, Living Environment, Chemistry, Global History & Geography, United States History & Government, Geometry and Algebra. The Regents prep courses are an excellent resource for proficient ELLs who still have to pass a specific Regents exam or for ELLs who are re-taking a specific Regents exam in hopes of improving their original score. One final support offered to proficient ELLs are the college/career services provided by our non-profit partner, CDI. The “College & Career Office” of the Student Life Center, provides invaluable support to ELLs who are in the process of applying to colleges or career training programs. Many of the staff members of the College & Career Office are bilingual and can provide crucial translation services in Spanish, French and Chinese Mandarin, which account for the languages spoken by the majority of our ELL population. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? Through intense and integrated collaboration between ENL and content teachers, instructional approaches used in ENL courses are also used in content area courses. With the assistance of the CR-ITI grant, nine additional teachers are currently enrolled in order to earn their additional certificate in TESOL certifiation. We regularly review our ENL and content curriculum to determine Common Core alignment. We also provide students with access to bilingual glossaries with academic and domain specific vocabulary in all content areas to promote L1 use. We currently employ a number of strategies to provide targeted intervention for our ELL math students. These include the use of in-class math tutors who, in concert with the individual math teacher, target specific ELL students during regularly scheduled Regents math class periods during both day and night classes. Included in this group of math tutors are individuals who speak Chinese, Spanish, and French. Peer math tutoring outside of regularly scheduled math classes is available for ELL students during period 10 and 11 in the student lounge downtairs in CDI from 2:20 to 4:00pm . The peer tutors are ELL students who have successfully completed the math course for which they provide tutoring, and have been recommended by their math teacher. Another form of math intervention available to ELL students outside of regularly scheduled math classes is volunteer math tutoring. Volunteer tutoring is conducted by a combination of current and former math teachers, and other adults proficient in math, that have received training from Learning Leaders. Volunteer tutors meet with ELL students individually, or in pairs, before or after their school day, or during the students’ free period. ELL students may be assigned to attend peer or volunteer tutoring by their math teacher, or they may choose to attend on their own. Finally, ELL math students are encouraged by their math teacher to attend specially programmed math Regents review classes, taught by math teachers, scheduled on Fridays leading up to the Math Regents exams in January and June. The new National Geographic EDGE curriculum provides access to online assessments as well as online supplementary support. We use this technology to provide students access to these materials anywhere they go (home, train, at work). 2  7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? We have a SETSS program at our school that provides additional support to our ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals while attaining English proficiency. Students are programmed for traditional ENL services, while adding supplementary support on their programs in the least restrictive environment. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. Our targeted intervention programs for our ELL students in ELA, Math, and History included the use of our Title III funding to provide supplementary programs before school, after school and on the weekends. These dually certified teachers provided on-going tutoring to ensure they meet benchmarks toward state standards. These content area teachers meet regularly with ENL teachers to assess student needs in their language development. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? We would like to expand this program by inviting our newly dually certified teachers and offer additional content support including Earth Science and Living Environment. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? N/A 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. Our academic program includes Common Core alligned curriculum. All ELL students are afforded equal access to all school programs. We encourage 100% participation. Our ELL students also have access to all schoo clubs (Cooking, Environmental, DNA lab, Art, Chess, Student Government). We believe that students who build their social skills also foster confidence in their language development. We also provide Advanced Placement courses in English, US History, Chemistry, Physics, Calculus, Spanish, Chinese, and French. Students also have access to College Now courses. Since we have a majority of ELL students in our school population, ELLs are in every student club and extra curricular activity. Our Student Government has both ELL students and mainstream students. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. We use the National Geographic EDGE series for ELL students. We have online access to assessments, and supplementary learning materials for students to use at home. Each classroom in our school building is equipped with a Smartboard and laptop cart. Students also have access to home language glossaries, dictionaries, and notecards. In content area classes, manipulatives are used, as well as some translated materials. We encourage students to continue reading independently at home in their home languages. Our instructional materials include: National Geographic's EDGE, The Grammar in Context series by Sandra Elbaum, the English Grammar series by Betty Azar, the Penguin Reader series, which seems especially beneficial for differentiating toward our ELLs. All ESL teachers use laptop carts in the classroom and teachers have now incorporated the use of Smart Boards into the levels one and two curriculum for aiding visual learners identified as SIFE. Our 18 licensed ESL teachers provide the above said interventions/strategies during the core day program in their ESL classroom. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? In our ENL Freestanding program, we provide home language support in our language courses (Spanish, Mandarin, French). All ENL teachers also uses L1 instruction whenever possible in their classes. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. We use the National Geographic EDGE series for ELL students. We have online access to assessments, and supplementary learning materials for students to use at home. Each classroom in our school building is equipped with a Smartboard and laptop cart. These materials are not only Common Core aligned, but also appropriate for each age group. They are also culturally diverse and meet the needs of our students. 3  The majority of our ELLs are newcomers, less than 3 years in US schools. These students have trended for the last three years to be placed in levels 1 and 2 ESL as the result of DYO periodic assessment. Our necomers students are particularly benefitted by our skills based curriculum and targeted materials for their level of ability. We use a variety of materials with these students, dep ending on the data produced from the various sources previously stated. These materials include: The National Geograhic EDGE curriculum, The Grammar in Context series by Sandra Elbaum, the English Grammar series by Betty Azar, the Penguin Reader series, which seems especially beneficial for differentiating toward our newcomers ELLs. All ESL teachers use laptop carts in the classroom and teachers have now incorporated the use of Smart Boards into the levels one and two curriculum for aiding visual learners identified as newcomers. Our 18 licensed ESL teachers provide the above said interventions/strategies during the core day program in their ESL classroom. c. The students who have been identified as receiving 4-6 years have trended to be placed in levels 3-6 ESL as the result of DYO periodic assessment. These students receive tutoring provided by our CBO, Comprehensive Development Inc. Our 14 students who have been identified as receiving more than 6 years still struggle in their content area classes, especially with reading comprehension and writing skills. Our program provides them with the necessary services to be college and career ready, especially in our drive towards implementing the CCSS. As with our SIFE students these students are benefitted by our skills based curriculum and targeted materials for the level of ability. Content area teachers have regular meetings and work closely with our 11 ESL teachers to strategize on best practices in serving the ELL population in the content area. Some of the strategies they use with these st udents are: adapted texts, differentiated lessons, distinguishing between academic and content area vocabulary, and decoding in reading. ELLs who have reached proficiency on the NYSESLAT are continued ELL accommodations on all Regents Exams for two years. ELLs who have reached proficiency on the NYSESLAT are provided support services at MCNDHS in a number of ways. Students onsidered proficient are also invited to participate in our school’s Small Group Initiative, where teachers in small groups of no more than 5 students tutor them. The SGI groups meet twice a week, Mondays and Wednesdays, for the entire academic year. ELLs are given the flexibility to approach any teacher in any subject area they might be struggling in to request small group tutoring. ELLs who are proficient are also afforded extra tutoring services thr ough the school’s “Saturday Regents Review.” These 2 ½ hour Regents prep courses are offered on 8 consecutive Saturdays prior to Regents exam week and are available in all subject areas including English, Living Environment, Chemistry, Global History & Geography, United States History & Government, Geometry and Algebra. The Regents prep courses are an excellent resource for proficient ELLs who still have to pass a specific Regents exam or for ELLs who are re-taking a specific Regents exam in hopes of improving their original score. One final support offered to proficient ELLs are the college/career services provided by our non-profit partner, CDI. The “College & Career Office” of the Student Life Center, provides invaluable support to ELLs who are in the process of applying to colleges or career training programs. Many of the staff members of the College & Career Office are bilingual and can provide crucial translation services in Spanish, French and Chinese Mandarin, which account for the languages spoken by the majority of our ELL population. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? We use the National Geographic EDGE series for ELL students. We have online access to assessments, and supplementary learning materials for students to use at home. Each classroom in our school building is equipped with a Smartboard and laptop cart. Students also have access to home language glossaries, dictionaries, and notecards. In content area classes, manipulatives are used, as well as some translated materials. We encourage students to continue reading independently at home in their home languages. Our instructional materials include: National Geographic's EDGE, The Grammar in Context series by Sandra Elbaum, the English Grammar series by Betty Azar, the Penguin Reader series, which seems especially beneficial for differentiating toward our ELLs. All ESL teachers use laptop carts in the classroom and teachers have now incorporated the use of Smart Boards into the levels one and two curriculum for aiding visual learners identified as SIFE. Our 18 licensed ESL teachers provide the above said interventions/strategies during the core day program in their ESL classroom. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). Members of our orientation team include, Gisell Martinez (Parent Coordinator), Windsor Tastaca (ELL Coordinator), Irene Lau (Assistant Principal), and members of our in-take team Elizabeth Acerra, Wei Chen, and Laura Fleder. Combined, the 4  orientation team speak Cantonese, Mandarin, Spanish, and French. Every newly enrolled ELL student will receive an Orientation regardless of when they enter during the school year. Parents also also invited for the Orientation meeting. We also have a mandated process where Guidance Counselors and members of our CBO meets with every new ENL student for an initial conference to determine any social and emotional needs. All ELL students are afforded equal access to all school programs. We encourage 100% participation. Our ELL students also have access to all school clubs (Cooking, Environmental, DNA lab, Art, Chess, Student Government). We believe that students who build their social skills also foster confidence in their language development. We also provide Advanced Placement courses in English, US History, Chemistry, Physics, Calculus, Spanish, Chinese, and French. Students also have access to College Now courses. Since we have a majority of ELL students in our school population, ELLs are in every student club and extra curricular activity. Our Student Government has both ELL students and mainstream students. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? We provide the following language electives: Spanish, Mandarin, AP Spanish, AP Mandarin, AP French (Fall 2015) 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? Paste response to question here: Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? Since we have a significant population of ELL students, we provide professional development to all teachers and staff on a regular basis. We discuss specific language acquisition strategies, vocabulary support, reading support, and how to use the Common Core effectively in the classroom. We exceed the 15% of professional development mandate from CR154 because we meet weekly to discuss ENL instruction. This personnel includes: Gisell Martinez (Parent Coordinator), Windsor Tastaca (ELL Coordinator), Irene Lau (Assistant Principal), and members of our in-take team Elizabeth Acerra, Wei Chen, and Laura Fleder. Combined, the orientation team speak Cantonese, Mandarin, Spanish, and French. The secretary invovled is Luz Garcia who works exclusively with our ELL department, she also speaks fluent Spanish. We meet the first week of every month, and additionally, the department meetings take place bi-weekly. These meetings allow us to coordinate and collaborate more effectively. The ENL and ELA teacher regularly meets to discuss curriculum and Common Core alignment. During our departmental and professional learning community times, teachers discuss assesssment data and curricular adjustments using the National Geographic EDGE curriculum. Teachers follow our inquiry cycle of examining a skill, co-planning, and then examining student work to best identify how to work with struggling, on-target, and advanced students. These meetings again happen bi-weekly. ALL ELL personnel will participate in monthly one hour seminar-workshops designed to enable the teachers to examine the effectiveness of their teaching, to explore and implement instructional models and academic intervention strategies aimed at improving Ells’ outcomes in standardized exams, and the construction of school-wide assessment exams. In addition, we have monthly departmental meetings where ESL teachers develop curriculum more closely aligned to Common Core Learning Standards. We will continue with our professional development in using collaborative planing and assessment development and analysis to increase ELL students performance. 5  Professional Development will be given on the following topics: o Using DYO data to monitor and revise curriculum; o Integrating CCLS rubrics with the language of the standards to provide specific feedback to students regarding their work; o Use of student data to plan and set goals student specific learning goals; o Developing capacity to utilize web-based student data tracking software (Skedula) to support the setting of student- specific learning goals Target Population(s): All content area and ESL teachers, Guidance Counselors, paraprofessionals, special education teachers, secretaries, parent coordinators and service providers working with ELL students. Responsible Staff Members: Principal, Assistant Principals ESL department PDs are held on: 9/28, 10/6, 10/19, 10/20, 10/26, 11/9, 11/16, 11/17, 11/23, 12/1, 12/7 ,12/14, 12/15, 12/21, 1/4, 1/5, 1/11, 1/19, 2/9, 2/22, 3/1, 3/7, 3/14, 3/15, 3/21, 3/28, 3/29, 4/11, 4/12, 4/18, 5/3, 5/9, 5/31 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. N/A We exceed the 15% of professional development mandate from CR154 because we meet weekly to discuss ENL instruction. AP ESL attends weekly Guidance department meetings to inform and support counselors in their work with ELLs. Guidance Counselors are trained in how to analyze data resulting from DYO periodic assessments and program students accordingly. These meetings also include training in the psychological needs of ELLs entering and coping with a new environment. AP ESL attends weekly Guidance department meetings to inform and support counselors in their work with ELLs. Guidance Counselors are trained in how to analyze data resulting from DYO periodic assessments and program students accordingly. These meetings also include training in the psychological needs of ELLs entering and coping with a new environment. Agendas are kept and referrals are created to keep record of this information. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? In addition to the mandated parent orientation meetings, Parent Teacher Conferences and School Leadership Team meetings, we provide regular parent meetings in order to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessments results, and language development needs in all content areas. Minutes and agendas will kept as records. Personnel that can provide translation services include: Gisell Martinez (Parent Coordinator), Windsor Tastaca (ELL Coordinator), Irene Lau (Assistant Principal), and members of our in-take team Elizabeth Acerra, Wei Chen, and Laura Fleder. Combined, the translation team speak Cantonese, Mandarin, Spanish, and French. The secretary invovled is Luz Garcia who works exclusively with our ELL department, she also speaks fluent Spanish. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. In addition to the mandated parent orientation meetings, Parent Teacher Conferences and School Leadership Team meetings, we provide regular parent meetings in order to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessments results, and language development needs in all content areas. We invite parents and adult students to come in for cultural and instructional meetings. During these meetings we hope to • increase opportunities to serve with staff members on various school committees, such as School Leadership Team, Health Committees, Cultural Heritage Programs • form a core group of parents based upon native languages to reach out to other parents, help in translations, help in 6  explaining the school and its curriculum to them • organize meetings/seminars for parents on the New Standards, Regents exams, and graduation requirements • organize parents to advocate for issues affecting the school in the city and state levels Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Paste response here: 7 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Michael Toise, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 8  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: Manhattan Comprehensive School DBN: 02M575 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Michael Toise Title Principal Irene Lau Assistant Principal Gisell Martinez Parent Coordinator Laura Fleder ENL/Bilingual Teacher Parent Windsor Tastaca Teacher/Subject Area Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach School Counselor Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 07/20/2017 07/20/2017 07/20/2017 07/20/2017 07/20/2017 9  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 02M575 School Name: Manhattan Comprehensive Night & Day Superintendent: LaShawn Robinso The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this (*Primary) conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. Our data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication include: gathering data from our home language identification survey, student emergency contact cards, and an intitial interview with each student in their home language. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. 0 Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Language Our parents' preferred languages for both written and oral communcation include: English, Spanish, and Chinese. 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. The documents our school typically disseminates every year that rquire translations include: parent coordinator welcome letter and newsletter, annual handbooks, parent-teacher conference announcements, after-school and club information, NYS testing dates, general overview of student curriculum, letters from school leadership, and graduation requirements. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide The formal face-to-face meetings our school typically has with parents throughout the school year include: parent-teacher conferences, intitial interpretation service(s)? 1  interviews, annual parent meeting hosted by ENL faculty. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) We mail out the required notifications to families in their desired languages. We also backpack home these notifications with students as well. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? We gather feedback from parents on the quality and availability of services through outreach from our parent coordinator, as well as during the annual meeting with ENL faculty. 2 
