 27Q351 School Name: ROCKAWAY COLLEGIATE HIGH SCHOOL Principal: HASSAN FULLER 2018-19 CEP-CS 1  Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC)   School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information Rockaway Collegiate High School 342700011351 9 – 12 School Number (DBN): 27Q351 100-00 Beach Channel Drive, Rockaway Park, NY 11694 718-734-3290 Phone Number: 718-734-3276 Fax: HassanFuller HFuller@schools.nyc.gov Email Address: School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): HassanFuller David Serrano Regina Covington Patrick Murray N/A Mary Franklin Amill Vazquez Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Dane Peters District Information Geographical District: 27 Superintendent’s Office Address: Elaine Lindsey Superintendent: 30-48 Linden Place Queens, NY 11354 Elindse@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718-741-3157 Phone Number: 718-741-7098 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC)   Queens South Marlene Wilks FSC: Executive Director: 82-01 Rockaway Boulevard, Queens, NY 11416 Executive Director’s Office Address: mwilks@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 718 642-5854 Phone Number: 718-391-6187 Fax:   Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) HassanFuller David Serrano Regina Covington Mary Franklin Amill Vazquez Dane Peters Barbara Martin Linda Nelson Patrick Murray *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable UFT UFT CSA   Magalie Boen Felicia Blakely Evelyn Quian Geraldine Martens N/A N/A Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Member/ Parent Parent Parent Parent Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/   Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with   the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement   Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Section 4: CEP Overview The school’s mission statement states that at Rockaway Collegiate High School learning is constant. We collaborate and strive to educate the whole child-academically, socially and emotionally. We cultivate responsible, compassionate, honest, skilled leaders by providing a rich and challenging curriculum that includes real world   experiences. Students discover who they are, challenge themselves and aspire to positively impact the world we live in. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. Rockaway Collegiate High School (RCHS), located within the Beach Channel Educational Campus, is a small public high school founded five years ago with the purpose of providing high quality education for the traditionally under served students of the Rockaways. The student population consists of 346 students and is 48.84% male and 51.16% female. 51.45% of students are Black, 34.68% Hispanic, 4.34% White, 4.62% Asian and 2.6% other. 100% of students are eligible for free lunch or reduced lunch. 19.65% students attending the school are classified as students with disabilities and 9.25% are English Language Learners. The majority of students come from the Far Rockaway neighborhood of New York City. RCHS is one of two unscreened high schools in the community and, as a result, serves many of the cities most disadvantaged students. The median income of the community is $20,080 with a local unemployment rate of 11%. The school strives to provide exceptional instruction for each student that will prepare them for college and career readiness. The school has created a college bound culture through visits to colleges and rigorous inquiry based instruction. The school strives to provide exceptional instruction for each student that will prepare them for college and career readiness. The school has created a college bound culture through visits to colleges and rigorous inquiry based instruction. The school has partnered with the Office of Post-secondary Readiness in providing our students access to SAT preparation, college/career workshops, and trips. Rockaway Collegiate High School also takes part in AP for All in which our students have access to in school Advance Placement classes (AP English Literature, AP Statistics, AP U.S. History, and AP Environmental Science) and external AP examination preparation. Lastly, our CUNY College Now program has provided students with enhanced opportunities for their preparation for post-secondary education. At the outset of the 2014-15 school year, Rockaway Collegiate High School was announced as a Community School, forming a partnership with a community based organization, Partnership with Children. Through this collaborative effort, the school has been better positioned to support the many social and emotional needs of all students. Partnership With Children has implemented the Compass program in which trained staff/certified social workers engage students in strategic social-emotional building and exposure to cultural activities and enrichment to support their development. Rockaway Collegiate High School has also partnered with Sheltering Arms to provide students and their families with counseling inside and outside of our school based on need. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. 0  The school’s lowest third students performed better this school year than in 2016-17. In fact, 68.75 percent of these students earned more credits in their third year in 2017-18 students than in their second year. Out of this group, 52.94 percent earned ten credits or more in 2017-2018. Credit accumulation for another special student population, English as a New Language Students, increased in 2017-2018. 88 percent of ENL student who entered our school as freshman this year (cohort W) earned nine (9) credits or more. 83 percent of students from other cohorts (T, U, and V) earned more than ten (10) credits in 2017-2018. Although ENL students did well in their classes, they did not perform as well in their first two Regents examinations. Only one student out of nine who took the living environment passed the exam. Students with Disabilities also struggled in their first two Regents examinations. 73 percent (8 out 11) scored 55 % or lower on the Algebra Regents. Fifty percent of SWDs (6 out of 12) who took the living environment Regents scored 55% of lower. As the table shows below, our students continue to struggle in Algebra and Living Environment. 2017-2018 Regents 2017-2018 Regents TERM 1 Percentage 59.21 63.41 52.17 23.53 Subject English US History Global History Algebra Earth Sci TERM 2 Percentage 40.43 57.14 27.85 21.51 57.58 36.71 Subject English US History Global History Algebra Living Env 14.29 Living Env. As a result of these factors, the key focus for the school revolves around improving student achievement on Regents examinations, particularly Global History, Living Environment, and Algebra. Additionally, the school will focus on developing stronger systems to support students in attending school so they are better able to accumulate credits. To support SWDs and ENL students, teachers collaborate in teacher teams to differentiate curriculum to provide multiple entry points to help students leverage the learning. Scaffolds, manipulatives, bilingual resources (ex. glossaries, dictionaries, textbooks) are examples of learning tools used as SWDs and ENL students acquire key content knowledge and skills. Our school has purchased Read 180 for students that demonstrate severe decoding and reading comprehension deficits (on an elementary school reading level based on 8th grade examinations and Performance Series testing). Boardworks is utilized by teachers for interactive learning support in content area classrooms. We have also purchased Castle Learning as an assessment resource for teachers to support Regents preparation and for students to practice/be assessed on key skills (ex. reading inference based texts, map skills, computational skills, etc.). We have incorporated tutoring during the day and after school to provide targeted and increased support for students who are struggling academically. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. 1  Over the past year, Rockaway Collegiate High School has made the most progress with the collaboration of teachers. Logistically, teachers have scheduled collaborative/co-planning time to meet with their department and Special Education/ESL colleagues at least three times a week. During these collaborative meetings, teachers engage in data inquiry, lesson planning, assessment creation, looking at student progress, and other important measures. The Office of Teacher Effectiveness also hosts teacher groups in which an external coach collaborates with and supports groups of teachers with their instruction, intervisitation, and social-emotional classroom practices to strengthen pedagogical practice. An area of focus for this school year is rigorous instruction as evidenced by our need to support our lowest third and to improve our Regents examinations results. It is imperative that in all classrooms, across subject areas, teachers' pedagogical practice strengthen to support student content and skill acquisition. 2  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 27Q351 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 09,10,11,12 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 329 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 2 2 8 5 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 6 6 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 79.0% % Attendance Rate 76.0% % Reduced Lunch 9.7% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 1.2% 32.8% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 5.2% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 1.1 4% 30% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation 74% 65% 63.4% 1.4% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A YSH Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A YES N/A N/A YES No N/A 96 98 81.1% 3.0% 24.3% 52.3% 5.5% 4.3% 4 26% 9.9 N/A N/A 66% 69% 64.1% 0% N/A No No N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A NO YES N/A N/A N/A YES 3  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Quality Review Findings Based on the most recent Quality Review Report (2017-18), our school received a “Developing” for QR Indicator 1.2 The report stated the following: Across classrooms, teaching practices are becoming aligned to the school's instructional focus that is informed by Danielson's Framework for Teaching. However, student work products reflect uneven student participation. Teaching practices across classrooms do not yet fully reflect the school's beliefs about how students learn best. Teaching practices result in uneven student engagement in appropriately challenging tasks and demonstration of higher order thinking skills by all learners. Quality Review Evidence School leaders identified the development of students’ literacy skills through standards-aligned written tasks and discussion as the school’s instructional focus. However, across grades and courses this practice is inconsistent with teacher-centered instruction in some classes. In a geometry class, questions and answers to teacher-asked questions were all directed back to the teacher. In the same class, students worked independently on a problem and were not given an opportunity to turn to a partner and discuss their work. In contrast, in a twelfth-grade English class, students worked in pairs as they revised their abstracts referring to the abstract checklist and rubric, with the teacher clarifying the difference between revising and editing their draft. Quality Review Analysis Based upon the recommendations made within the Quality Review, an area for improvement lies within improving the overall level of cognitive challenge for students across all classrooms. By improving and increasing the number of learning activities requiring students to apply higher order thinking skills, students will become more engaged in school and will be more likely to accumulate credits. School Data: In the first term of the 2017-2018 school year, 26.32% of students passed a Math Regents; In term 2 of the same school year, 18.18% passed a math Regents. 4  Informed by Capacity Framework Element – Rigorous Instruction, current data and our most recent QR, there is a need to refine the use of strategies that provide the opportunity for students to engage in learning activities that require students to utilize higher order thinking skills, especially students within their second year of high school. This needs assessment informed the development of the annual goal listed below. Priority Need(s) That Will Be Addressed: Strengthening Pedagogy - Providing targeted supports to teachers to strengthen their teaching practices and enable them with the skills to implement engaging lessons that will reach all learners Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, the Algebra Regents pass rate for students in Cohort W will increase by 5% as measured by the Scholarship Report. 5  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Point Person(s):  Assistant Principal Supervision Implementers: Teachers of 1st year high school students  Peer Collaborative Teacher/s Instructional Actions/Strategies/Activities 1st year high school students September 2018- June 2019 Teachers will administer the Common Core-aligned New York City Baseline Performance Assessment in both ELA and Algebra & Geometry in October and the New York City End of Year Performance Assessment in early May to monitor the progress of 1st year high school students. All teachers of 1st year high school students. Teachers will update student progress consistently through the use of Skedula to measure student progress throughout the school year and their progress towards earning 10 or more credits. Teachers and Guidance Counselors will conference with students and parent/guardians to monitor student progress through the use of Skedula, collaboration to set learning goals, and provide strategies to support student learning to ensure students remain on track towards earning 10 or more credits. Teachers will use findings from data to incorporate multiple entry points into the curriculum so that all students (including ELL's and SWDs can access the curriculum and also make classroom experiences relevant. Castle Learning will also be incorporated. Professional Development All teachers September 2018- June 2019 Point Person(s):  Principal 6  Through BFSC, Peer Collaborative Teacher/s administrator, teacher leaders, and teacher teams will learn pedagogical strategies to support all learners. Teacher grade teams will engage in Professional Learning Communities based upon the Atlas Protocol inquiry of student work to monitor student progress and identify instructional strategies to implement identified below: Graphic organizers and visuals including pictures, diagrams, and charts to help all students— and especially the lowest third—easily recognize essential information and its relationship to supporting ideas. Create and implement a year-long professional development calendar for all teachers in a collaborative setting focusing on research-based instructional strategies. Use Advance data to inform differentiated professional development in a collaborative setting using small groups PD and various coaching models (peer inter-visitation, demonstrations, and individual support). Implement Individual Teacher Improvement Plans to provide focused support. Through common planning time, teachers will meet five times weekly to plan, implement, and analyze classroom assessments and monitor progress of students. Targeted academic intervention will be provided for students based on assessment of academic and emotional needs. AP for All Peer Collaborative teacher to support Advance Placement Initiative teachers with curriculum, instruction, and enrichment for students. Parent Involvement and Engagement-  School Development Committee Implementers:  Assistant Principal Supervision  Peer Collaborative Teacher/s All teachers September 2018- June 2019 Point Person(s):  Principal Implementers: 7  Asst. Principal  Guidance  Parent Coordinator  CBO Increased communication to inform parents of credit requirements (includes communication in multiple languages based on the HLIS) Individual meetings with teacher teams and families during parent engagement time Implementation of parent workshops to train parents about credit requirements and how they can support their child’s academic success. Informed by Capacity Framework Element All stakeholders in the school community share a common goal of ensuring that all students are equipped with the knowledge and skills required to be successful in college and beyond. All teachers September 2018- June 2019 Implementers: -Principal, AP, Coaches, Teachers, CBO, Guidance 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Throughout the 2018-2019 school year, Rockaway Collegiate H.S. plans to incorporate varied means to not only engage parents in the school community but to give them the tools to support their child/children in understanding CCLS and how they can provide an enriched educational environment at home. The school will host ongoing academic workshops for parents on Common Core Learning Standards, practical application at home, how CCLS looks in different subject areas, etc. Some of these workshops will be hosted during the pre-planned Parent-Teacher Conferences scheduled during the 2018-19 school year. Timeline- September 2018-June 2019. Point Person/s- Parent Coordinator, Teachers, CBO (Partnership With Children), Guidance, and Administration. The school will offer additional college preparation workshops for parents, including topics on financial aid and college opportunities for ELL and SWD students. 8  Timeline- Ongoing (at least two workshops in the Fall 2018 and two workshops in Spring 2019) Point Person/s- Parent Coordinator, Teachers, CBO (Partnership With Children), Guidance, and Administration. Academic support will also be addressed during Parent Association, School Leadership Team meetings, and individual parent meetings. Timeline- September - June 2019 Point Person/s- Parent Coordinator, Teachers, CBO (Partnership With Children), Guidance, and Administration. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Members of the School Development Committee including the Administrative Team, Peer Collaborative Teacher/s (includes AP for All) and for demonstration and modeling, developing norms and common language among teachers and students in the implementation of curriculum, development of assessments, and analysis of data for the subject/grade. The Danielson's Framework and Advance system data for teacher’s evaluations. Engaging in intra/inter-visitations, out of school PD, teacher team meetings, and at least two periods of common prep time to allow for common planning, professional development, department meetings and other structures to foster teacher collaboration. Use of the NYCDOE resources such as the Common Core Library and Student Support instructional resources recommended by the DOE Handbook for Professional Learning, professional texts and articles, workshop materials and curriculum resources from Engage NY. School Skedula account. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant SIG PTA Funded In Kind X Other 9  Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, 30% of students in second year of Algebra will earn a 65% or higher on the Mock Algebra Regents. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) Mock Regents Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 0  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? Quality Review Findings Based upon the most recent Quality Review, our school received Developing in QR indicator 1.4 - Maintaining a culture of mutual trust and positive attitudes that supports the academic and personal growth of students and adults. Data Analysis Informed by Capacity Framework Element— Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Priority Need(s) Establishing a student government across grades to ensure student voices are heard and students are involved in decision making. Communication between families and school staff to engage parents in students academic success and the importance of students being at school (attendance). Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, there will be a 2% increase in attendance as measured by the Period Attendance Report. 1  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?   Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Student led activities (family engagement)  Point Person(s):  Assistant Principal Administration Implementers:  Guidance Counselor Social Worker   Attendance Teacher Social Workers   Community Associates  CBOs Attendance Team Reformulated school attendance team to develop and implement interventions to individually support students with poor daily attendance including: Students with poor daily attendance September 2018- June 2019 Weekly meetings of the attendance team to monitor student attendance through data analysis. Appointing a specific adult within the school for each student with a pattern of excessive absences to provide direct intervention, utilizing research based practices to re-engage students with school. Home visits by attendance teacher and family worker for long-term absences Small group student counseling through the community based organization to support students transitioning back into school and ensure students are engaged with school Parental outreach efforts through Skedula, Global Connect phone calls, direct phone calls, e-mails and mailings. Establishing a peer mentorship program through Peer Group Connection-Center for Supportive Schools 2  Recognition and Incentives Perfect attendance board updated monthly to honor students with perfect attendance. All students September 2018- June 2019 Point Person(s): Assistant Principal Administration Implementers: Guidance Counselor Incentives to reward students with outstanding attendance. Social Worker Incentives such as NBA Cares program and tickets to local events such as professional sporting events to reward students with exceptional attendance. Incentives to parents of students that have outstanding attendance. Advisory Program All students September 2018- June 2019 Attendance Teacher CBO Social Workers Community Associates Point Person(s): Social Worker Implementers: All advisory teachers Guidance Counselors CBOs Developing and implementing advisory lesson plan for 2018-19 that focus on Restorative Circles. Monthly professional development session to review upcoming advisory lessons and support teachers in the implementation of the lessons. Consistent parental contact from the faculty The use of Skedula to track student progress and communicate with families. Partnership with -ACCES-VR Through the implementation of the Coop Tech program, students will have access to job training and matching services during the school day, providing an additional avenue to re-engage students with the education process. All students and families September 2018-June 2019 Point Person(s): Principal Implementers: Social Worker Guidance Counselor 3  3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. The school will host ongoing workshops informing parents of the different supports in place in ensuring their child's social-emotional and academic success. Some of these workshops will be hosted during the pre-planned Parent-Teacher Conferences scheduled during the 2018-2019 school year. Workshops to raise awareness about the impact of attendance and the implications of poor attendance. Timeline- September - June 2019 Point Person/s- Parent Coordinator, Teachers, CBO (Partnership With Children), Guidance, and Administration. Our CBOs, Partnership With Children and Sheltering Arms, will offer additional workshops for parents, including topics on parenting strategies for adolescents, how to provide academic and emotional support at home, etc. Timeline- Ongoing (at least two workshops in the Fall 2018 and two workshops in Spring 2019) Point Person/s- Parent Coordinator, Teachers, CBO (Partnership With Children), Guidance, and Administration. Academic and social-emotional support by parents for their child's/children's success will also be addressed during Parent Association, School Leadership Team meetings, and individual parent meetings. Timeline- September - June 2019 Point Person/s- Parent Coordinator, Teachers, CBO (Partnership With Children), Guidance, and Administration. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Members of the Administrative Team, Social Worker, Guidance Counselor, Community Based Organization Social Workers and resource coordinator, Attendance Teacher, Community Associates to develop and implement interventions to improve student attendance. Weekly meeting time for Attendance Team. Incentives provided through the Community Based Organization School Skedula account. Regularly scheduled advisory meetings for teachers and students. 4  Partnership with Community Based Organization, Partnership with Children, to provide interventions and supports for students and staff. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, student daily attendance will improve by 2% as measured by the daily attendance rate for the first semester. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Attendance reports in ATS. Weekly Community School Data presentation. New Vision Data Sorter Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 5  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Quality Review Finding Based upon the most recent Quality Review, our school received a Proficient rating in QR indicator 4.2 - Teacher Teams and Leadership Development. The majority of teachers are engaged in structured, inquiry-based collaborations across content areas and use student work and performance data to inform teacher practice The instructional and curricular capacity of teachers across the majority of content areas is strengthened and impacts the promotion of school goals. Supporting Evidence  All departments meet three times a week to work on lesson planning and test creation, inquiry work, analysis of student work and other data, and scoring assessments. They also participate in weekly whole-staff professional development that is developed and facilitated by a Staff Development Committee of teachers and school leaders. Based on interest, teachers also meet in teams with a specific focus, including how to support the work of first- and second-year teachers, special education, and student attendance. A review of agendas and minutes shows examples of their work. A math teacher responded during the teacher meeting that the common planning time helps teachers work as a department and gives them time to discuss co-planning. An English teacher discussed the department’s focus on vertical alignment and identifying skills across grade levels as they analyze data and trends across grades to inform their instruction. A science teacher said that they review the student performance data to determine what skills are lacking and meet with their assigned assistant principal to collaborate on how to best support their students.  During the teacher team observation of the English department, the members of the team followed the agenda that had been determined by the members of the team. Members of the team have assigned roles including those of facilitator, recorder, and timekeeper. The facilitator reminded members of the team that during this cycle of inquiry, the team determined the need to scaffold the skill of analysis and commentary based on the Regents and Advanced Placement English Literature data. The team also reviewed the agenda and the team’s overall focus on vertical alignment and preparation for Advanced Placement and college. Using a protocol and a lesson rubric that focused on the lesson’s alignment to the standards, key shifts, instructional supports, and assessment, members of the team worked in pairs and reviewed a style analysis lesson, identifying gaps in the lesson and skills gaps students might encounter and how to best address those gaps. The pairs shared their findings with the group and the team discussed the use of supports and scaffolds and when to remove those scaffolds, as one of the biggest challenges students face is the transition from reading passages with teacher developed supports to reading passages on their own and determining for themselves which supports to use. 6   At the beginning of the year, based on Measures of Student Learning (MOSL), the staff developed as their schoolwide instructional focus, “At Rockaway Collegiate High School, we are committed to actively developing students’ literacy skills through analytical research that cites evidence to supports arguments in discussions and in writing tasks.” Each department team then developing a goal around literacy for their specific content. For example, the math department is focused on students’ analysis of data in mathematical applications and incorporating writing and annotation and the English and social studies departments are focused on using a common rubric when evaluating writing. Teachers shared that through the examination of student work, midterms, and finals, they are able to monitor the progress of their students in alignment with the schoolwide instructional focus on literacy and more department specific literacy goals, positively impacting the school’s progress toward their instructional goals. Analysis of QR findings: Data: Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, teachers will engage in inquiry work to identify learning strategies that support ELLs and SWDs so that there will be an increase of 10% of ELLs and SWDs passing the Algebra and Living Environment Regents. 7  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Point Person(s): Principal Implementers: Assistant Principal Supervision Lead Teacher Peer Collaborative Teacher/s Professional Development & Instructional Strategies Students in the schools lowest third September 2018- June 2019 Administration/Peer Collaborative Teacher/s will instruct designated content area teachers in effective pedagogical strategies. Teachers will engage in department meetings at least 3 times per week to collaboratively discuss instructional strategies that can be implemented across the department to support students in the lowest third. Department meetings will focus on inquiry, with teachers analyzing cycles of student work to surface and share targeted instructional strategies to support students in the lowest third. Teachers will engage in a series of lesson studies by department, working collaboratively to create learning tasks that require higher levels of student thinking. A professional development series on engaging students in rigorous tasks, focusing on implementing the following strategies into classroom practice: Formulating engaging, rigorous tasks that will support students in acquiring necessary content knowledge and skills. Ensuring that all students (SWDs, ELLs, students performing below level, etc.) can access the rigorous content. 8 Point Person(s): Principal Implementers: Assistant Principal Supervision Hiring Committee Based upon the data, the school made strategic hiring and programmatic decisions to support students in the lowest third by taking the following steps: ELA & Mathematics teachers September 2018- June 2019 Recruiting dual-licensed teachers in with Special Education and ELA or Special Education and Mathematics to support students in the lowest third in English and Math courses in their preparation for the ELA and appropriate Mathematics Regents examination. Teachers assigned to co-teaching courses are provided with regularly scheduled common planning time to develop multiple entry points into the curriculum for all students, especially those in the lowest third. Students in 9th grade are programmed for a double period Algebra class. PM school and tutoring during and after school are offered for students to prepare for Regents examinations in varied content areas. The following strategies will be implemented to increase family-community ties and supports students in the lowest third achievement: Families of students in the school’s Lowest Third September 2018- June 2019 Point Person(s): Social Worker The school will host a curriculum night in September, to introduce and/or reinforce the Regents examination requirements for each student. College Workshops featuring post-secondary institutions Teachers will implement Student Led Conferences in the Spring. Each teacher will schedule an appointment with each family during which time students will review their progress through and examining student work and grades . The following strategies will be used to build trust: Increase school-family communication with Parent Coordinator and by publishing a monthly calendar with parent workshops Guidance Counselors Implementers: Advisory Teachers All stakeholders Sept. 2018- June 2019 Point Person(s): Principal 9 Students in the schools lowest third Teachers will conference with all students including students in the lowest third to monitor student progress, collaborate on setting learning goals and provide strategies to support student learning. Teachers will use Skedula to track student academic and social progress. Positive messages will be sent to families, as well as positive phone calls for students as well. Guidance Counselor CBO Implementers: All stakeholders: Lowest third Parents and students, school staff members 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. The school will host ongoing workshops informing parents of the different supports in place in ensuring their child's social-emotional and academic success. Some of these workshops will be hosted during the pre-planned Parent-Teacher Conferences scheduled during the 2018-2019 school year. Timeline- September 2018, November 2018, March 2019, May 2019 (along with other pre-planned dates based on school event calendar). Point Person/s- Parent Coordinator, Teachers, CBO (Partnership With Children), Guidance, and Administration. Our CBOs, Partnership With Children and Sheltering Arms, will offer additional workshops for parents, including topics on parenting strategies for adolescents, how to provide academic and emotional support at home, etc. Timeline- Ongoing (at least two workshops in the Fall 2018 and two workshops in Spring 2019) Point Person/s- Parent Coordinator, Teachers, CBO (Partnership With Children), Guidance, and Administration. Academic and social-emotional support by parents for their child's/children's success will also be addressed during Parent Association, School Leadership Team meetings, and individual parent meetings. Timeline- Weekly and Monthly (Fall 2018-Spring 2019) Point Person/s- Parent Coordinator, Teachers, CBO (Partnership With Children), Guidance, and Administration. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment 0  Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 1. Use of teacher teams, peers, Instructional Coaches and Lead Teachers for demonstration of modeling, developing norms and common language among teachers and students in the implementation of curriculum and analysis of data for the subject. 2. Scheduling for common planning time for co-teachers and departmental meetings. 3 School Skedula account. 4 CBO/Guidance/AP of Administration to effectively communicate with families and planning workshops. 5. Professional Development resources , such as the NYCDOE Handbook for Professional Learning. 6. Guidance Counselors to identify student programming needs 7. Castle Learning Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, teacher observation reports will reflect feedback directly related to supports for ELLs and SWDs and minutes from math and science teams will reflect data driven instructional moves to support ELLs and SWDs. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Advance System and CPT meeting minutes Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 1  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Quality Review Findings Based on the most recent 2017-18 QR Report, the school received a Proficient for QR Indicator 4.1 Teacher Support and Supervision. Findings: School leaders provide effective feedback that accurately captures strengths and next steps for teacher practice that articulates clear expectations for teacher practice through frequent cycles of classroom observations and analysis of student work/dataTeachers are supported in their instructional practice and reflective growth in alignment with the Danielson Framework for Teaching. Supporting Evidence  During the teacher meeting, teachers shared that during professional development sessions there is an open forum where teachers can raise concerns. Teachers also indicated they meet with their assigned assistant principal throughout the year and receive feedback on their instructional practice and professional goals. All teachers completed a goal-setting template at the beginning of the year. This template includes looking at the observation data and identifying areas of strength and areas for growth and developing SMART goals based on the student performance data. Teachers identified a schoolwide goal to focus on, one example stating, “Designing coherent instructional practices that incorporate differentiated learning activities in order to support the diverse needs of ALL students.” In addition, teachers developed a personalized professional goal in Domain Four of the Danielson Framework for Teaching. One example states, “Continued activity with the department meetings to create a coherent English Department Curriculum and the Staff Development Committee to facilitate professional development sessions that share best practices and increase student achievement in our school. School leadership indicated that at the beginning of the year, a round of informal observations were conducted of all teachers, that they met with all teachers before the second round of observations and are focused on providing additional support to the new teachers on the staff. They also review student performance data and use it to inform staff development. In addition, members of the school’s administrative team have scheduled when they conduct informal and formal observations for their assigned teachers as evidenced in written observation schedules. As a result, teacher practice and student achievement is positively impacted by frequent cycles of classroom observation based on the analysis of student data and identifying areas of strengths and next steps in teacher development  Teacher observation reports include specific language from the Danielson Framework for Teaching rubric that supports the rating along with actionable next steps. For example, feedback in one report was, “As a next step we reflected on this particular lesson, plan for ways for all students to understand how to derive a central idea from a 2  text, to show their understanding of important concepts, and to determine individual learning.” Another example stated, “To further push student self-assessment, it would be great to incorporate a writing checklist and an explicit writing rubric so that students can monitor where they are and what needs to be included in their writing.” Quality Review Analysis Based upon the findings of quality review, teachers are provided clear expectations and next steps for continued growth in their teaching practice. Informed Capacity Framework Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. School leaders to regularly collect and analyze student data to make informed decisions and communicate clear next steps to staff, provide targeted supports and follow up. Priority Need (s): Differentiation of instruction across content areas supporting development/enhancement of higher order thinking skills and addressing needs of all students (including ELLs and SWDs). Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, increase the graduation rate by 3% from 66% to 69% 3  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Point Person(s): a. Principal Implementers: b. Administrative team c. Peer Collaborative Teacher/s  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Through frequent cycles of teacher observation, school leaders will: All Teachers September 2018-June 2019 Provide specific, time bound and actionable feedback to support teacher professional growth in engaging students in learning based upon the Danielson Framework for Teaching. Utilize the Danielson Framework for Teaching as a common language as to what good instruction looks like. Support teachers through individualized teacher improvement plans and department instructional rounds. Meet individually with teachers to provide exemplar learning strategies to improve student engagement through more cognitively challenging learning activities. Frequent monitoring of Advance data to monitor individual teacher progress with the use of weekly snapshots, goal-setting meetings and progress monitoring, and mid-year check-ins. School-wide emphasis on the creation and implementation of higher order/rigorous students tasks. Teacher visits to other schools to observe subject area classes 4 All Teachers September 2018-June 2019 Point Person(s): a. Principal Implementers: b. Administrative team c. Peer Collaborative Teacher/s Professional Development: All teachers will receive weekly staff professional development emphasizing the creation and implementation of mastery objectives and learning tasks aligned to standards. Each teacher will meet with the principal/assistant principal to develop individual goals. A Lunch and Learn series of professional development sessions (at least once a month) for new teachers, to support their transition into the school. New teachers will receive an individual mentor. Provide individualized teacher support through professional development by the Peer Collaborative Teacher/s. This will include A.P for All initiatives. The utilization of a school-wide curriculum map/instructional rubric to evaluate the quality of curriculum. Use Advance data to inform differentiated professional development in a collaborative setting using small group PD and various coaching models (side-by-side, in-class coaching, peer inter-visitation, demonstrations, EngageNY resources, etc.) Implementation of Inquiry by teacher teams. The following strategies will be implemented to increase family-community ties: All Families The school will host a curriculum night in September, to introduce and/or reinforce the Regents examination requirements for each student, meet parents/families, learn about the curriculum content, means of communication with the school and instructional initiatives. September 2018- June 2019 Point Person(s): a. CBO b. Administrative Team Implementers: a. All teachers 5 All Teachers September 2018- June 2019 b. Guidance Counselors Point Person(s): Principal Implementers: a. Administrative team and Peer CollaborativeTeacher/s Parent workshops on post-secondary educational opportunities Establish partnership with CBO The following strategies will be implemented to develop trust: The creation of a School Development Committee to play a central role in the development of professional development activities and calendar. Honoring staff achievements through celebrations of best practices. Implementing inter-visitation among teachers. Utilizing teachers as resources in supporting next steps among colleagues. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. The school will host ongoing workshops informing parents of the different supports in place in ensuring their child's social-emotional and academic success. Some of these workshops will be hosted during the pre-planned Parent-Teacher Conferences scheduled during the 2018-2019 school year. Timeline- September - June 2019 Point Person/s- Parent Coordinator, Teachers, CBO (Partnership With Children), Guidance, and Administration. Our CBOs, Partnership With Children and Sheltering Arms, will offer additional workshops for parents, including topics on parenting strategies for adolescents, how to provide academic and emotional support at home, etc. Timeline- Ongoing (at least two workshops in the Fall 2018 and two workshops in Spring 2019) Point Person/s- Parent Coordinator, Teachers, CBO (Partnership With Children), Guidance, and Administration. Academic and social-emotional support by parents for their child's/children's success will also be addressed during Parent Association, School Leadership Team meetings, and individual parent meetings. Timeline- September - June 2019 6  Point Person/s- Parent Coordinator, Teachers, CBO (Partnership With Children), Guidance, and Administration. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 1. Peer Collaborative Teacher/s and School Development Committee to support development of differentiated professional development opportunities. 2. Various professional resources from NYCDOE and NYSDOE resources such as EngageNY and the NYCDOE Handbook for Professional Learning. 3. Research and utilization of books, videos, and articles about research based techniques 4. Scheduled coverages for teacher inter-visitation, modeling, and meetings with administrators. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, students with deficient credits will be programmed for i-learn and tutoring. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Graduation tracker. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 7  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. School Survey Data: Informed by Capacity Framework Element- Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Community Mobilization meetings are held on a monthly basis. Parent Coordinator engages in one on one relational meetings with parents. School has implemented a parent university in which there is development for parents such as job skills, certification, financial and computer literacy. The school's priority need is for an increase in parent engagement as evidenced by parent participation in parent-teacher conferences/school-community events. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, students in cohort X will earn at least 6 credits in core subjects. 8 Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All parents September 2017- June 2018 Point Person(s): a. Administration b. CBO Implementers: b. Advisory Teachers c. Community workers d. Guidance Staff Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Strategies : The school will offer additional college preparation workshops for parents, including topics on financial aid and college opportunities for ELL & SWD students. Frequent Parent Association and School Leadership Team meetings based upon a pre-planned calendar. Host six planned evenings for parents to meet with their child’s teacher, including a curriculum night and four periods for parent-teacher conferences. The school will host a winter and spring concert, inviting parents to attend the event. The school will hold town hall meetings at the end of marking period to acknowledge student achievement with certificates and other incentives. The school will continue its tradition of awards nights, inviting parents and community to attend. 9  Various workshops for parents/guardians such as Skedula, reading a transcript, and supporting adolescents socially and emotionally. Communication: The school will create a monthly calendar to be posted on Skedula and throughout the school. Events will be announced to parents through phone calls, direct mailings, and email. Monthly PTA and SLT meetings Progress reports Parent night meetings All parents September 2017- June 2018 Point Person(s): a. CBO b. Administration Implementers: a. Advisory Teachers b. Guidance September 2017 June 2018 Point Person(s): Guidance, College Advisor Implementers: Community Based Organization Staff Community mobilization meetings with members of the community which includes the business community that may lead to part-time employment Events for Parents: All Parents Through the Community Schools Grant, our partner CBO, Partnership with Children, will host additional workshops for parents. Topics will include the following: a) Job skills and placement b) Parenting workshops- College Access, Financial Literacy Parent University – Computer literacy, GED, ESL Parent retreats Monthly Community Schools meeting 3b – Parent and Family Engagement 0  If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. The school will host ongoing workshops informing parents of the different supports in place in ensuring their child's social-emotional and academic success. Some of these workshops will be hosted during the pre-planned Parent-Teacher Conferences scheduled during the 2018-2019 school year. Timeline-September - June 2019 Point Person/s- Parent Coordinator, Teachers, CBO (Partnership With Children), Guidance, and Administration. Our CBOs, Partnership With Children and Sheltering Arms, will offer additional workshops for parents, including topics on parenting strategies for adolescents, how to provide academic and emotional support at home, etc. Timeline- Ongoing (at least two workshops in the Fall 2018 and two workshops in Spring 2019) Point Person/s- Parent Coordinator, Teachers, CBO (Partnership With Children), Guidance, and Administration. 3. Academic and social-emotional support by parents for their child's/children's success will also be addressed during Parent Association, School Leadership Team meetings, and individual parent meetings. Timeline-September - June 2019 Point Person/s- Parent Coordinator, Teachers, CBO (Partnership With Children), Guidance, and Administration. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 1. Permits to allow the use of space outside of the school day. 2. School Skedula account. 3. Community based organization relationship 4. Additional School Social Workers 5. Family Workers 6. Community School Director 7. Friday Events (ex. movie) Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA C4E 21st Century Grant X SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other 1  Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, there will be a 5% increase in the number of parents attending school events as measured by sign in sheets at events. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Parent sign in sheets. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) ● DATA ANALYSIS: -Level 1 and Level 2 on the 8 th grade ELA CC -Teacher Progress Report / Teacher Referral -Report Card -Regents Score Transcript/Diploma Evaluation ● Individual Educational Plan Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) ● Extra Course Sections- reducing class size ● Blocked Scheduling for 9 th graders Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) ● Small class size ● Small group instruction ● During the School day ● Before School ● 1:1 Tutoring ● After School ● Lunch Period by Student Request ● Saturdays ● Castle Learning ● Additional Writing Course-Argumentative Writing Course, Research Writing ● AP Literature ● PM School ● Saturday School ● English Language Learners ● Tutoring ● Parental Engagement ● Attendance Mathematics ● DATA ANALYSIS: ● Co-op Tech and ACCES-VR-providing students with academic and career opportunities. ● College Now ● AP Statistics ● Small class size -Level 1 and Level 2 on the 8 th grade Math CC Dual Certified Teachers providing ● Small group instruction ● During the School day ● Before School 3  -Teacher Progress Report / Teacher Referral -Report Card instruction in all ICT classes. ● Blocked Scheduling for 9 th graders -Regents Scores ● Castle Learning ● 1:1 Tutoring ● After School ● Lunch Period by Student Request ● Saturdays Transcript/Diploma Evaluation ● Individual Educational Plan ● English Language learners ● Parental Engagement ● Attendance Science ● DATA ANALYSIS -Teacher Progress Report / Teacher Referral -Report Card -Regents Scores Transcript/Diploma Evaluation ● Individual Educational Plan ● English Language Learners ● Parental Engagement ● Attendance ● Extra Course Sections- reducing class size ● Additional Mathematics through Engineering Courses ● Tutoring ● Co-op Tech and ACCES-VR-providing students with academic and career opportunities. College Now: Mathematics Courses AP Environmental Science ● Tutoring ● Co-op Tech and ACCES-VR- providing students with academic and career opportunities. ● College Now: Health Sciences Courses ● Extra Course Sections- reducing class size ● Small class size ● Small group instruction ● During the School day ● Before School ● 1:1 Tutoring ● After School ● Lunch Period by Student Request ● Saturdays 4 Social Studies DATA ANALYSIS: -Level 1 and Level 2 on the 8 th grade ELA CC -Teacher Progress Report / Teacher Referral -Report Card -Regents Scores Transcript Evaluation 1. Individual Educational plan 2. English language Learners 3. Parental Engagement 4. Attendance 1. Mandated Counseling 2. Student request 3. Parental Request 4. Teacher Referral Attendance At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) ● Extra Course Sections- reducing class size ● Project Based Learning Strategy ● Small class size ● Small group instruction ● During the School day ● Before School ● 1:1 Tutoring ● After School ● Tutoring ● Co-op Tech and ACCES-VR -providing students with academic and career opportunities. ● College Now: Humanities ● Lunch Period by Student Request ● Saturdays ● Small groups During the School Day ● Individual ● Specific gender ● Grade level ● Students are given academic, social, and emotional counseling by the guidance counselor, social worker and CBO: Partnership with Children ● Teacher mentoring ● Advisory ● Attendance mentoring ● Gender/Grade level specific forums 5  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 9 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. Students will receive school supplies such as notebooks, writing utensils, folders, dictionaries/glossaries, and other necessary educational materials. Guidance Team and CBO (Safespace) will provide counseling services to students and parents to ensure that the social-emotional and academic needs are met. After-school tutoring will be available for additional academic support. CBO (Partnership With Children) will provide clothing, food, and other assistance needed by families. Ongoing parent outreach will be implemented by guidance team, CBO, teachers, and administration. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 6  N/A 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. N/A 7  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. Teachers are recruited by the recruitment committee and are engaged in a group interview, group lesson planning, demo lesson, and individual interview. When hired, teachers are assigned within their content areas and supported by administrators and Peer Collaborative teacher/s. New teachers are assigned a buddy/mentor teacher as well as take part in New Teacher Chat and Chew professional development. All teachers participate in weekly school based professional development. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). The purpose of this plan is to create professional development supports for faculty to improve student academic achievement through targeted learning opportunities for the school faculty. Additionally, this plan will serve to support educational initiatives including the City-wide Instructional Expectations, Common Core Learning Standards and the implementation of Advance with the New York State Professional Development Standards [available on-line]. The plan is based on a needs assessment, based upon multiple qualitative and quantitative data sets. 1. Professional Development Needs: The primary professional development needs include training in the successful implementation of the Common Core Learning Standards in all content areas, an in depth understanding of the Danielson Framework for Teaching to support improved classroom instruction and the use of student data in planning and modifying instruction to improve student achievement. 2. Professional Development Activities: Rockaway Collegiate High School will expect and encourage staff to participate in learning activities designed to foster professional growth. The purpose is for staff to engage in meaningful and ongoing activities in a collaborative learning 8  community geared towards generating increased student academic achievement through improved instructional practices. Research supports professional development that: Deepens teachers’ knowledge of content and how to teach students Helps teachers understand how students learn specific content Provides opportunities for active, hands-on learning Enables teachers to acquire new knowledge, apply it to practice, and regularly reflect on results with colleagues Is collaborative and collegial Is intensive and sustained over time (Darling-Hammond, 2009) Professional development opportunities which support the development of pedagogical skills and professional growth include the following examples: In school professional development sessions Central/District professional development workshops Inquiry Meetings Grade Team Meetings Classroom Modeling/support from expert coach or consultant Participation in professional organizations Pre & Post Observation Meetings Collaborative Planning Curriculum Writing In-Service Courses Mentoring a new teacher Professional Conferences Classroom Inter-visitation State Assessment Training/Analysis 9  Summer Institutes Self/Group assessment using Danielson Framework for Teaching Group lesson plan development 3. Professional Development Goals Faculty will be able to describe and implement improved instructional practices through utilizing the Danielson Framework for Teaching when reflecting on and discussing the impact of teaching on student learning and achievement. Faculty will develop improved analytical skills to understand student achievement data and utilize results of periodic assessment to shift instruction to ensure all students learn. Faculty will develop and demonstrate enhanced content knowledge by challenging students with rigorous instruction through successful implementation of the Common Core Learning Standards. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. Our TA program will assist our students in meeting proficiency (content knowledge and skill acquisition) by provision of the following resources- 1. Double period ELA and Math classes for 9th grade students with the use of the programs Read 180 and IXL. 2. An extended day for students that need additional support in Math and ELA. 3. Chemistry students will be receiving additional periods to support learning of Chemistry content/skills. 4. After school and Saturday programs for tutoring and Regents preparation. 5. ESL pull-out for Entering ENL students who need additional language support. 6. Implementation of Castle Learning for Regents preparation. 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). 0  Administration, Guidance, SDC, CBOs, and Peer Collaborative teachers will support the TA program by engaging in the following- 1. Supporting staff and student programming to accommodate additional classes and enrichment. 2. Purchasing and ongoing professional development in regard to the effective use of the programs Castle Learning, Read 180, and IXL. 3. Ongoing weekly and monthly meetings for program progress monitoring, planning, and support. 4. Ongoing parent outreach to keep parents up to date in regard to program, student progress, and how parents can support. 5. SDC team and other instructional staff ensuring all students have access to high-quality curriculum and are making progress based on CCLS. Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). N/A 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. N/A 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section 1  Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) N/A N/A N/A N/A $2,705,336 references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Column B Verify with an (X) Section Reference(s) X Sect.5 Part 4a 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not 2  available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 3  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. Rockaway Collegiate High School, Parent and Family Engagement Policy in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team and Parent Association as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students Rockaway Collegiate High School will support parents and families by: Providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; Providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; Fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; Providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; 4  Sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; Providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all Parental Involvement and School Quality parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English as a New Language students and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents. This information will be maintained by the school. The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement Hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; Encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams and Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) Supporting or hosting Family Day events; Establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; Encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; Providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; Developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; Providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School Parent Compact [SPC] School-Parent Compact (SPC) Rockaway Collegiate High School is implementing a School-Parent Compact, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. 5  I. School Responsibilities: I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: Using academic learning time efficiently; Respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; Implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; Offering high quality instruction in all content areas; I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: Conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; Arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; Respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; Providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; Providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; Ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff Ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; Notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; Arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; Planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; 6  Provide general support to parents by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; Assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); Sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; Supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; II. Parent / Guardian Responsibilities: II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; 7  ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; III. Student Responsibilities : III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 8  Addendum: Community School Partnerships Directions: The Community School (CS) strategy is directly aligned to the Framework for Great Schools. Community Schools bring schools and community partners together and integrate academics, health, youth development, and family engagement to provide students with the tools and opportunities they need to succeed. The Core Services in Community Schools are Expanded Learning Time (ELT), Attendance Supports, Family Engagement, and Health & Wellness. Part 1 – Community School Partnerships Goal(s) How is the CS strategy integrated into academic instruction at your school, and what impact has it had on student academic outcomes? At the outset of the 2014-15 school year, Rockaway Collegiate High School was announced as a Community School, forming a partnership with Partnership with Children. Through this collaborative effort, the school has been better positioned to support the many social and emotional needs of all students. Partnership With Children has implemented the Compass Program in which trained staff/certified social workers engage students in strategic social-emotional building and exposure to cultural activities and enrichment to support their development. Via the Community School Strategy, Rockaway Collegiate High School has also partnered with Sheltering Arms to provide students and their families with counseling services inside and outside of the school based on need. In 2016-2017, the CS strategy was able to provide a career exploration event for 9th and 10th grade students who were exposed to a variety of young professionals. Rockaway Collegiate strives to provide exceptional instruction for each student that will prepare them for college and career readiness. The school has created a college bound culture through visits to colleges and rigorous inquiry based instruction. In 2016-2017, the community school strategy was able to support seven trips to further enhance student’s professional and personal preparedness for College. The Community School strategy has also supported RCHS by implementing inquiry across all academic subjects. This strategy has supported the development of informative assessments so that teachers can focus on specific students. Indicate the summative goal(s) of the Community School for the 2018-19 school year. Be sure to construct the goal to be SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Realistic, and Time-bound. 1. By June 2018, all teachers will implement learning tasks/activities that address various student needs and support meaningful student engagement leading to the development/enhancement of critical-thinking and analytical skills by students at all academic levels respectfully. 2. By June 2018, 100% of parents will be introduced to Pupilpath/Skedula during parent-teacher conferences, one-on-one meetings, and mail/email correspondence so that we can maintain an attendance rate of 85% or better. This is in support of bolstering student attendance by the implementation of a concrete system for parents to be aware of their child's/children's attendance on a daily basis outside of staff phone, letter outreach, student success mentors and home visits. This will also ensure that there is continued communication between home and school, in a variety of ways, to support student accountability and success. Pupilpath/Skedula allows for correspondence in multiple languages to ensure that communication is accessible to all of our parents. 3. By June 2018, Rockaway Collegiate High School will end the school year with 85% attendance. 4. By June 2018, Partnership with Children would have collaborated with Tutoring Programs/Educational Specialists to support the implementation of Study Hall at RCHS. Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Community School Annual Goal(s): How will achieving your Community School Goal(s)--in Expanded Learning Time (ELT), Attendance Supports, Family Engagement, and Health & Wellness--support your academic goals for students? 9  Family Engagement is a vital competent that will support RCHS academic goals for students. By increase family engagement, RCHS will provide specific tools to all parents/families to support their child/children in understanding CCLS and how they can provide an enriched educational environment at home. In addition, to providing these tools ongoing conversation in one to one meetings with teachers and at Parent Teacher Conferences, Parents will also support RCHS overall vision of developing college prepared students. Attendance Support: A concrete system such as Pupilpath/Skedula will be an additional tool to streamline all communication with parents regarding their child’s school attendance. If students are not in school they are not learning or accumulating credits. Attendance has a direct impact on all of RCHS academic goals. All traditional ways of communicating with parents have been utilized at RCHS however Pupilpath/Skedula will support the academic goals by the communication being immediate and live with parents. Health & Wellness: Develop and implement a nurturing, empowering, safe, and supportive learning environment. A PPT (Pupil Personnel Team) which will consists of guidance counselor, Sheltering Arms Social Workers, and School Social Worker, will meet once a week to identify high needs, priority one students and develop an action plan to meet social and emotional needs. COMPASS Program will support the Health & Wellness goal by partnering with a Culinary Agency/Individual to help students develop an awareness and understanding on how eat healthier and the impact it has on their bodies. COMPASS After School Program: PwC Program Manager will develop a comprehensive socio-cultural enrichment program at RCHS. This goal directly supports RCHS’s academic goal by exposing them to different activities/programs while connecting all different styles of learning and also exposing them to college/vocational careers. The COMPASS Program serves as a supplement program that connects all academic, interpersonal, social-emotional linkages that historically demonstrate to support a student’s confidence and ability to be involved in their community. Part 2 – Community School Partnerships Core Services Action Plan Part 2a. Identify the Community-based Organization (CBO) partnerships that you will develop in ELT, Attendance Supports, Family Engagement, and Health & Wellness, their target student population(s), and scope of the services provided. As well as supporting schools’ supportive environment and attendance work, CBOs should be helping to support your school’s instructional focus. CBO Partnership CBO Partnership with Children Target Population School-wide and Chronically Absent Students Scope of Service SY18-19 SMART Goal Our Attendance Goal is 85% for this academic year. We will target chronically absent students in the Tier 2 pyramid (Students with Absences in the 83-89%) and moving them to the Tier 1 area. Teachers will target two students in their class that meet this criteria and become mentors to these students as well as offer incentives to them and their families in order to increase 0  CBO Sheltering Arms, RCHS Students, parents, staff attendance. Community School Director will work closely with all Success Mentors to ensure that Data sorter data is used accurately and shared with families/students Sheltering Arms will provide all mental health, case management, crisis intervention, SEL Staff Professional Developments, Parent Workshops, and external referrals to different tiers of students/families at RCHS Part 3 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 3a. Indicate resources your Community Partnership will leverage to achieve your summative SMART goal(s) and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Grant, CSO assigned staff Part 3b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) X Title I SWP Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside 21st Century SIG Grant School X Achievement Funding C4E Other 2. Part 3c. Describe how the school will partner with the Lead CBO to do the following: 1. Community Schools are expected to partner with a community-based partner organization (CBO) and together with members of the School Leadership Team, hire a Community School Director. The Director will lead implementation of the asset and needs assessment process, and other critically important coordinating activities. Indicate how you will leverage this aspect of the work. Community Schools are expected to personalize the needs of all students, through strategic programming and services, as determined by the asset and needs assessment, and must also offer Expanded Learning Time (ELT) and mental health programming. In completing this section, ensure that you think about how: (1) the right services are provided to the right students and families at the right time; and (2) how you will seamlessly coordinate services with instructional programming happening throughout and outside of the school day. Indicate how you will implement this work, and describe other programming you anticipate to be in place to strengthen this initiative. 1  3. 4. Community Schools are expected to emerge as Partnership Schools, which are places where parents and families feel welcome, actively participate in the conversation and decision-making around the renewal of their schools, and have many opportunities to advocate for their children. Monthly meetings and Community School Forums engaging families and community stakeholders will be a critical part of this family engagement strategy. Describe how you will implement this aspect of the work. Community School Principals are expected to meet on a weekly basis with their Community School Director, select Assistant Principals, key staff, and other CBOs, to analyze trends in data and case manage individual students. Data tools – including the New Visions Data Sorter - and training will be available for schools to use. Indicate how you will implement this aspect of the work. This year, the goal is to have the Community School Director focus in increasing parent engagement by working closely with the Parent Association and Parent Coordinator. Furthermore, the Community School Director will utilize Data Sorter data to inform RCHS staff, attendance team members, students, and parents on the importance of maintaining a high attendance. That data will support the implementation of the Success Mentoring Program. The CSD will oversee the implementation and development of best practices for the Success Mentoring Program. This year, the CSD will re-connect and expand his/her relationships with existing community based organizations in the Far Rockaway Peninsula and neighboring Queens’s area. The goal of connecting with various organizations will bring upon resources that will align with the necessary social-emotional and instructional supports. The COMPASS Program provides after-school programming at Rockaway Collegiate High School. In addition, Sheltering Arms will continue to provide an extensive support and tier of services to all students/families that will benefit from its mental health programming. Services are delivered based on a referral process ranging from; teacher to social worker referral, parent self-referral, and or student self-referral, and through administration. This past year, via the Community School Budget we worked closely with external providers to enrich ELT component. Based on the Community Forum feedback, students and parents suggested expanding its programming to the Arts, Theatre, Coding, and cooking class. We will conduct a community forum throughout the year to identify the needs of the community; in addition utilize the data that was gathered in the previous forum. Additionally, we will host parent workshops/conferences to provide them with an understanding of how to work collaboratively with RCHS Staff, CBO Partner, Parent Coordinator, and their child. We will also hold 5 parent monthly activities that will reach 10% of our families as measured by sign in sheets at the events and the numbers entered in the PAR. Furthermore, align school wide events to PTA meetings, PTA attendance, school events and assemblies. Community School Team meetings will allow for our continued efforts with the school administration, parents, and community partners to be engaged in the work ahead and also allow them to be vested by supporting this community school initiativ Community School Principal, Community School Director, and CBO Partner will analyze all trends in data to 1) share with all stakeholders so everyone has an understanding on what’s actively happening at Rockaway Collegiate High School, 2)tweak or enhance best practices implemented to support all aspects of the Community School work, 3)meet on a weekly basis to review data (both academic and attendance) to monitor progress.e. Part 4 – Community School Partnerships Oversight 2  Part 4a. Key Staff and Partners 1. Name and describe the scope of involvement of all community partners working in the school (include partners supporting ELT, counseling, enrichment, etc.) 2. Name the members of your Community School Team and how meetings will be organized and structured to engage all stakeholders and be focused on results. 3. Explain data strategies including the use of the data sorter, and steps that the school will take to ensure that the appropriate interventions are provided to the right students 1. CSD, CBO Partner, and RCHS Administration will work closely to implement a Success Mentoring Program to increase attendance to 86% by June 2018. 2. CSD, CBO Partner, and overall RCHS staff will continue to increase parent engagement and support parents/caregivers in becoming more involved in their child’s education. 3. CSD will continue to enhance external relationships with organizations that support RCHS Community School work and provide more resources to students/families. 2. Principal, CSD, CBO Partner, After School Partner COMPASS, Parents, UFT Representative, Parent Coordinator, Parent Association, and community stakeholders will structure the Community School Team. CSD will organize and ensure that all stakeholders actively participate in the meetings. Meetings will be held every 3rd Thursday of the month. CSD in conjunction with Principal will work together to generate agendas and co-facilitate the meeting. CSD will be responsible to notify and consistently communicate with all stakeholders regarding meetings dates and provide updates where needed. 3. For 17-18 year, CSD will utilize Data at the beginning of the school year to contact families one to one, obtain accurate contact information from students/families. Furthermore, Data Sorter will be utilized as the source to provide weekly data at the Attendance Meetings. The CSD will ensure that all Success Mentors are provided with weekly updates on their mentee’s attendance. The goal is to use Data Sorter across all Attendance Tier’s to generate targets, selective, and universal interventions at the school with all stakeholders and families. Part 4b. Indicate resources needed including human resources, instructional resources, and schedule adjustments to implement the Community School program. Grant and CBO assigned staff Part 4c. Timeline for implementation and completion, including start and end dates. All goals are aimed to begin September 2017 and to be completed by June 2018. Part 4d. Mental Health Work Plan Separate from this S/CEP, schools will complete a Mental Health Work Plan that will become an addendum to this document. 3  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 4  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: Rationale: Our ELLs have demonstrated difficulty with passing ELA and Global History Regents. They require additional support in literacy, building academic vocabulary, and writing skills in order to be successful on these important exams. Our Regents data from 2017-2018 shows that in January, only 1 ELL passed out of 6 who sat (17%) and in June, only 1 ELL passed with a 55 out of 8 who sat (13%). For Global History, in January, 1 ELL passed out of 5 who sat (20%) and in June no ELLs passed out of 10 who sat (0%). Examining their work qualitatively, we can see that ELLs are writing essays that are too short to effectively accomplish the task, and they need to build stamina. Additionally, an intensive focus on building academic vocabulary and increasing the ability to use a variety of complex sentence structures effectively is required. An in-depth item analysis of Regents data shows that ELLs require additional support in working with shades of meaning of vocabulary words in the context of literary or historical text, and that tier 3 vocabulary proficiency must be developed further. Subgroups and Grade Levels: 9th - 12th graders will receive literacy instruction in the Global History content area. 11th-12th graders will receive literacy instruction in the ELA content area. Schedule and Duration: 40 hours of per session ($50.13/hr including fringe benefits) for 4 teachers for a total of $8,020.80. Teachers will offer after-school tutoring for 8 weeks at the end of Fall term and 8 weeks at the end of Spring term. In the fall term, ELA support will take place after school on Thursdays from 2:30-4:30, beginning November 8 and ending January 17 for a total of 9 sessions (18 hours), with one additional session on January 18th from 2:30-4:30 (2 hours). Global support will take place after school on Wednesdays from 2:30-4:30 beginning November 14 and ending January 16 for a total of 8 sessions (16 hours), with two additional sessions on January 11th and 18th from 2:30-4:30 (4 hours). In the spring term, ELA support will take place after school on Thursdays from 2:30-4:30 beginning on April 4 and ending on June 13 (10 sessions, 20 hours). Global support will take place after school on Wednesdays from 2:30-4:30 beginning on March 20 and ending on May 29 (10 sessions, 20 hours). The students will be engaged in activities to build academic vocabulary and content knowledge. Some activities will be reading-based, while others will be writing-based. Students will engage in dialogue with each other in English as a part of all activities, and both courses include an audio-visual component to build listening comprehension skills. We will focus on building students' stamina and skill when reading and writing in English. Accurate comprehension of extended reading passages will be a focus, as will the critical analytical skills required to be able to write persuasively using strong evidence. Attendance records will be maintained for each class in one binder. Parent outreach will be conducted by ENL and content teachers using over-the-phone interpretation. Records of these calls will be kept centrally in Skedula, as well as written down and placed in the Title III binder. A flyer will be created, translated, and distributed in the home languages of Spanish, Arabic, and Haitian Creole. Copies will be maintained in the Title III binder. Language of Instruction: English, with native language materials and supports in Spanish, Arabic, and Haitian Creole as needed. # and Types of Certified Teachers: There will be one Global History content teacher, one ELA content teacher, and two certified ENL teachers. 5  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Types of Materials: Modern History Textbook/Workbook for literacy support in Global History - $83.04 per student for student bundle (textbook, workbook in English and Spanish, teacher edition, online component) for 15 students, $1245.60 total; English 3D materials for literacy support in ELA at $55.04 per student (workbook, reader, online component) for 15 students, $1,069.60 total; Bilingual dictionaries and glossaries, pencils, pens, notebooks, paper, $33.48 total. OTPS Grand total = $2,348.68 Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: Rationale: We have several brand new teachers this year who have not yet received comprehensive training on best practices for working with ELLs. Even those with experience may need a refresher in terms of how to incorporate specific strategies into their instruction that can promote ELL student achievement. Our ELLs also have difficulty passing Regents exams in the content areas, which indicates that we as a staff should put some effort into rethinking our instructional practices. Teachers to Receive Training: All teachers will attend a 3-hour NYSUT ELT seminar entitled, "Designing Effective Instruction for English Learners." The seminar costs $800. 6 of our content-area teachers who will be selected based on experience (newer teachers) will complete a 5-hour online seminar entitled, "Academic Language for English Language Learners." 2 of these teachers will be the ELA and Global History teachers who will work with the students for direct instruction after school. The total cost for the 6 teachers to participate in the online seminar is $420, for a grand total of $1220.00 spent on professional development. Schedule and duration: This professional development will take place on Chancellor's Conference Day - January 28th, or, if possible, over the course of two Monday afternoon professional development sessions sooner this fall. Topics to be covered: The seminar on designing effective instruction for ELLs presents 5 high-leverage principles for lesson and activity planning that teachers can use to effectively engage their English language learners in classroom learning activities. The online seminar will focus on academic language. This seminar will help general education teachers target and improve academic language for all learners across disciplines and grade levels, particularly those who are learning English. Participants will identify the differences between social and academic language, analyze the academic language demands of a text, and examine research-based strategies for targeting academic language development in all domains of language. Participants will reflect on and strategically redesign a lesson based on NYS standards and best practices for English learners. Name of Provider: NYSUT ELT 6  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: Rationale: We want all of our ELLs and their families to be fully aware of their options when it comes to college attendance. We want them to be fully aware of academic opportunities for English Language Learners as well as to be informed of their options when it comes to funding the students' college education. Especially since our ELL families may have to contend with challenging legal situations, we want to make sure to clearly communicate to them and make them understand how they can get their students into college and then how they can fund it. In the lower grades, we would like our ELL families to be aware of community resources that are available to them in the neighborhood. More specifically, we'd like to encourage them to tap into the language classes and resources that the public library has to offer. Schedule and Duration: One meeting in the fall for families of 9th and 10th graders and one meeting in the spring for 11th and 12th graders. Each meeting will last approximately 2 hours and take place in the evening when most parents will be able to attend (after work). For both meetings, we will hire interpreters for the entire duration in the following 3 languages spoken by our students and their families: Spanish ($55/hr), Arabic ($75/hr), and Haitian Creole ($75/hr). That is a total of $205/hr for 4 total hours, for a grand total of $820 for interpreting. Additionally, we will need to provide 4 hours of per session to one pedagogue ($50.13/hr) to cover both meetings for a total of $200.52. Grand Total Parent Engagement: $1,020.52 Topics to be covered/Providers: NYCPL Peninsula branch will come in to Rockaway Collegiate to present to students and their families about classes and resources they offer. CUNY Queensborough College CLIP program will come in to Rockaway Collegiate and present to families about language access options for their students as they transition to college. Parents will be notified by flyers to be sent home and phone outreach by the parent coordinator and ENL teacher. Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits)  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. Supplies and materials 7  Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title.  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL 8  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 27 School Name Rockaway Collegiate High School Borough Queens School Number 351 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Frances De Sanctis Coach type here ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Kerry Pinkerton Teacher/Subject Area Rosalia Perez-Liranzo/Special Teacher/Subject Area type here Related-Service Provider Joseph Cappellano Superintendent Elaine Lindsey Assistant Principal Jean Woods-Powell Coach type here School Counselor Henrietta Dixon Parent Michelle Slaughter Parent Coordinator n/a Field Support Center Staff Member Laura Brown Other (Name and Title) n/a C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 1 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 1 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics 9  Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 346 Total number of ELLs 40 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 11.56% Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 1 2 4 3 K Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 5 6 7 8 0 0 0 0 9 0 0 0 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? In reference to assessing the early literacy skills of our students, Rockaway Collegiate High School uses the New York State Identification Test for English Language Learners (NYSITELL) to identify entitled students at admission. The data from this assessment informs us as to the entering ENL level of our students: Entering, Emerging, Transitioning, Expanding, or Commanding. For the 2017-2018 school year we have continuing ENL students and new arrivals. We also look at years in an English Language School System, noting that 26 out of 34 current ELLs (Entering - Expanding), 76.4%, are here six years or less. We have 7 long-term ELLs here six or more years. Of those 7 students, 6 have IEPs. 1 was enrolled in a school outside of New York for at least a year. This information helps to inform our school’s instructional plan for these students. Patterns across the NYSESLAT modalities indicate that our students need continued work in reading and writing. For those students with a home language of Spanish, we also administer the Spanish LAB on admission, and this important data is used to assess the student’s 0  literacy skills in the native language, a very important assessment for instructional planning for these students. This test is administered by licensed pedagogues. Research has shown that strong literacy skills in the native language/L1 transfer to the second language/L2 and are a positive indicator for academic success. We also have teacher-created assessments that are used across the content areas. These formative assessments alert teachers of the critical skills that students may be missing due to differences in sequence and quality of instruction between here and their home countries. The data provided by these formative assessments allows teachers to strategize and support students in gaining any skills they may be missing. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? We have a school-wide inquiry process across departments with the express purpose to identify and work to build the skills that students may be lacking. We particularly focus on SWDs and ELLs during this inquiry process. During the most recent inquiry process undertaken by the whole school at the departmental level, teachers examined the effectiveness of the use of formative assessments in the classroom, and their impact on student achievement. Almost all classes showed improvement in student performance when formative assessments were used to measure student learning at least 2-3 times per week. In particular there was a focus on ELLs and SWDs and their growth and progress in grasping the concepts that were taught. ELLs and SWDs in particular showed more growth with the implementation of formative assessments in their classes than without. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? We use the NYC Beginning of Year and End of year Perfomance Tasks to measure student growth across the content areas and to identify areas of need so we can focus on addressing them in our instruction. Regents data this year will help us continue to evaluate the success of our push-in program for ELLs. Additionally, we monitor growth on the NYSESLAT and use that information to program students. We disaggregate the data on the NYSESLAT to analyze each of the modalities, and also look at students' total score and growth. The Scantron Series, administered in the 9th grade, helps us determine baseline reading and math skill data on all our students. We examine the ELLs' and SWDs' results closely so we can be aware of the gaps in basic skill acquisition we are working to compensate for. Success for our English Language Learners is not just success on examinations, but a continued growth of language acquisition, increase in social and academic vocabulary, participation in all school programs, extracurricular activities, assistance in the college applicaton process, and inclusion in the entire school community. These are objective measurements and subjective evaluations, ensuring that our English Language Learners achieve success. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? Teachers meet by department three times per week to collect and analyze assessment data for trends relating to skills that students may be lacking. Teachers then co-plan interventions to address those skills that students require further instruction to improve. The ENL teacher works with departments to provide language support during instruction, modify assignments, and provide assessment accommodations to ENL students. In the 2017-2018 academic year, we plan to work more regularly as grade teams to more precisely align instruction across grade levels. In these grade level teams we could also analyze data and use it to address skills that are necessary for success in more than one content area, and that should be practiced in varying forms in each of the different classes. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] Not applicable 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. The data patterns across the proficiency levels indicate that our ENL students are progressing well at the lower levels, but are struggling to make the jump from the Expanding Level to Commanding. In particular, students need to boost their reading comprehension and writing skills. The students generally score well on the listening and speaking subtests of the NYSESLAT with the exception of our very new admits who score at the Entering or Emerging level in all modalities. For our continuing tenth, eleventh and twelfth grade ELLs, data patterns from the Spring, 2017 administration of the NYSESLAT showed varied levels of growth across the proficiency levels. 11 of these continuing students went up at least one level. 6 Expanding level 1  students remained at the Expanding level. The students who received standalone services in 2016-2017 showed the most improvement in NYSESLAT scores, while students receiving push-in services tended to maintain their level or even score a level lower on the NYSESLAT when compared with previous administrations. No students scored at the Commanding level in the Spring, 2016 administration. These troubling trends were addressed during the 2016-2017 school year by restructuring ENL push-in services. ENL students were grouped together by grade level in ELA classes, allowing the ENL push-in teacher to work with them consistently in ELA classes. We saw vast improvement in ELA Regents scores in January, 2017, with 5 current ELLs at the Transitioning and Expanding levels scoring 65 and above on the exam. We had a Transitioning level student score 74, and an Expanding level student score 79, which are both near or above the scores that deem a student to be college and career ready. A Commanding-level ELL scored 88 on the test in January, 2017, while another Commanding-level ELL with IEP scored at the college and career readiness level in June, 2016. We continued to see improvements in NYSESLAT scores for the Spring 2017 administration with 3 students scoring at the Commanding Level. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? Teachers meet by department three times per week to discuss trends related to analysis of assessment data. The ENL teacher shares these findings during the department meetings. Teachers then co-plan interventions to address those skills that students require further instruction to improve. The ENL teacher works with departments to provide language support during instruction, modify assignments, and provide assessment accommodations to ENL students. In the 2017-2018 academic year, we plan to continue the department-level work, while adding on a grade-level component to better align instruction across content areas. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. Instruction for ELLs at RCHS follows the CR Part 154-2 Grades 9-12 English as a New Language (ENL) Units of Study and Staffing Requirements. According to the Spring 2017 NYSESLAT scores we will place students heterogeneously by grade level in content area ELA classes for the Integrated ENL period and have also scheduled students for the Stand-Alone ENL required number of periods. Our Entering NYSESLAT level students will have 12 periods of ENL, 4 periods of Stand-Alone ENL, 4 periods of Integrated ENL and 4 periods of flexibility of Stand-Alone ENL or Integrated ENL in the Content Areas. Those students who score Emerging on the S'17 exam will have 8 periods of ENL: 4 periods of Integrated ENL, 2 periods of Stand-Alone ENL and 2 flexibile Stand-Alone or Integrated ENL Content Area, our Transitioning students will have 4 periods: 2 periods of Integrated ENL and 2 periods of either Stand-Alone ENL or Integrated ENL Content Area, our Expanding level students will have 4 periods of Integrated ENL and our Commanding/Proficient students will have 2 periods a week (.5 units of study) of Integrated ENL in ELA/Content Areas. b. TBE program. If applicable. N/A c. DL program. If applicable. N/A 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? 2  The ENL teacher pushes in to ELA classes (one per grade level where all ELLs are programmed) to provide services directly to ELLs for the required number of minutes per week for each proficiency level. ELL students requiring standalone minutes are programmed into a standalone class for the required number of minutes per week. ENL teacher co-teaches the ELA class focusing on providing appropriate accommodations to ELL students based on their level. Content and ENL teachers collaborate via a variety of coteaching models, such as parallel teaching, alternative teaching, team teaching, and one teach one assist. ENL teacher coplans with content teacher. Teachers work together to group students effectively for each lesson. Teachers plan for accommodations based on ENL level, required minutes of push-in support per week, and to provide content, assignment, and assessment modifications and adaptations. HLA is not a part of this curriculum because we only offer freestanding ENL and not bilingual. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. As we do not have a Bilingual Program at RCHS core content is delivered by the content area teachers. The language of instruction is English and the ENL teacher provides Integrated ENL modifications to instruction, assignments, and assessments in the content area. Co-planning and other department collaboration ensures that content is made more comprehensible to foster language development and meet the Common Core LS demands. ENL teacher adapts and modifies instruction and assignments for each ELL level. ENL teacher provides additional instructional supports and scaffolds such as visuals, activities to build background knowledge, targeted vocabulary instruction, writing scaffolds such as graphic organizers and sentence and paragraph frames, and opportunities to build reading comprehension through close readings of selected passages, repeated readings, annotation, and the chance to hear the text read aloud. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? As we do not have a bilingual program at this time, students do not participate in native language arts. We do however offer Spanish classes to our students and ELLs are included in these classes. We also have Spanish, Haitian, and French speaking staff members who may use the native language in informal assessments during the school year. Students are offered translated materials which will enrich their reading skills in the native language. We plan for our ELL students to participate in language classes that may lead to a NYC LOTE Examinations in their native language offering instruction and on-going evaluation during the school year. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status Our plan for SIFE (Students with Interrupted Formal Education) students begins with the identification and screening of students who enter as new entrants to the New York City Public School System, code 58's, with a HLIS (Home Language Information Survey) of a language other than English (OTELE). A thorough review of the HLIS, particularly page 2, which informs us of prior schooling experience, and parent interview, gives us background information as to how to best assist these students. We currently have 4 identified SIFE English Language Learner (ELL) students who continue to progress. We will continue to service these students in ENL and offer one-on-one tutoring for the SIFE students identified this year. Teacher assessment of skills and appropriate grouping for instruction are crucial for our students to be prepared for their Regents Examinations. Our SIFE students continue to progress as teachers utilize strategies to increase their English language proficiency such as scaffolding, visual support, graphic organizers, etc. The use of the SMART board in our classes offers visual support for our ELLs. All of our English Language Learners are entitled to test modifications, including extended time, separate location, use of bilingual glossaries, and translated versions of exams. Our newcomer ELLs in the ENL Program receive differentiated instruction, teacher and native language support, and all other aforementioned interventions. All ELLs receiving services attend our ENL program with our ENL teacher, Ms. Pinkerton. There is heterogeneous grouping by grade level in the Integrated ENL classroom, while students at the Entering and Emerging levels are grouped together in the Standalone 3  classroom. We plan to obtain a computer program with high interest for this group, as well as utilize the SMART board and applications available for ENL instruction. Utilization of technology offers instruction and strategies appropriate for those students receiving services 4 to 6 years. We currently have 6 Long-Term ELLs, here more than 6 years. The priority for these students, many of whom have excellent speaking and listening skills, is to utilize high interest reading materials and offering instruction in the writing modality, the writing process and providing numerous opportunities for expression in writing in the common core curriculum. In reference to former ELLs at the Commanding level, they are offered all testing accommodations for two years - the year after receiving profiency and the subsequent year. We phase out their push-in services gradually by continuing to offer two classes per week for both years after receiving the commanding score. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? At Rockaway Collegiate High School, English Language Learners with an IEP are in either our ICT or our self-contained setting. As we conduct Integrated ENL in a “push-in” model, we are use techniques to effectively teach these students in a co-teaching model. Teachers co-plan and explore curriculum topics, units, logistics and individual student needs. They have prepared an extensive co-teaching handbook. Each one of the RCHS Lesson Planning Templates for Differentiating in the ICT classroom has a dedicated area for differentiated planning on the lesson planning template for ELLs. We currently have 7 IEP/ELLs at Rockaway Collegiate High School. 2 are Commanding, 3 are Expanding, and 1 is Transitioning. All receive integrated ENL as well as having an IEP teacher in the ICT class. One is scheduled for self-contained classes, but is an LTA. These students are placed in the least restrictive environment; the majority are in collaborative team-teaching classes. We currently have 1 Commanding Level ELL who is programmed for self-contained classes with push-in services twice a week. ELLs with IEPs (Individualized Education Plans)/SWDs are serviced by licensed content area teachers, teachers of students with disabilities, and the ENL teacher in a collaborative team-teaching setting in the least restrictive environment. Grade level materials are used that provide access to academic content areas with an emphasis on the acquisition of an academic vocabulary and English language development. The ENL teacher confers with this team to plan for the diverse needs of this particular school population incorporating the spirit of team planning in the ENL lessons. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? Our ELL-SWD students achieve their IEP goals with the instructional flexibility of an effectively co-taught classroom. The teacher delivering the content is the "content specialist," and the teacher co-teaching in the content classroom is the "learning specialist." This second title focuses on the role of the teacher enhancing the classroom environment. The ENL teacher provides Integrated ENL in these classes. Both teachers provide instructional supports and scaffolds, as well as modifying and adapting assignments and assessments based on students' ENL level and IEP goals. Support teachers provide additional instructional supports and scaffolds such as visuals, activities to build background knowledge, targeted vocabulary instruction, writing scaffolds such as graphic organizers and sentence and paragraph frames, and opportunities to build reading comprehension through close readings of selected passages, repeated readings, annotation, and the chance to hear the text read aloud. These students are well on their way to achieving proficiency. We will continue to monitor the progress of our ELLs with IEPs and follow their growth in this academic school year as well as across their high school years. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. Rockaway Collegiate High School has targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and content area studies. As we currently have 40 ELLs across all 4 grades, these interventions are for grades 9-12. Our ELLs are comprised of subgroups: Commanding= 6 students, Expanding= 15 students, Transitioning= 12 students, Emerging= 5 students, and Entering= 2 students. In English Language Arts and ENL we offer differentiated instruction to support the different learners in a class. They 4  are supported by faculty who speak Spanish, and who are offered professional development and other support for designing lessons to reach students with limited English proficiency. RCHS offers inquiry-based instruction, small group tutoring before and after school, a Saturday Program, and Regents test prep. In reference to mathematics, these interventions are also provided. Every ELL student has been given a comprehensive Glossary of Terms for the content area in his or her native language. We offer intervention services in Spanish and English. We also offer continuing transitional support for ELLs reaching proficiency on the NYSESLAT. We currently service 7 former ELLs. They receive push-in services with the ENL teacher and are offered all testing modifications per the NYSED guidelines including continuation of test modifications for those students who are “Commanding” on the NYSESLAT in 2016 and 2017. We also currently have 9 ELL students at RCHS with IEPs, and targeted interventions for these students include ICT classes with a co-teaching model. Additionally, those who require mandated counseling services meet with the social worker and/or guidance counselor for individual and group counseling once or twice a week as per their IEPs. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? Our ENL Program has continued to grow. As we implement the policies and amended New York State Commissioner’s Regulations (CR) Part 154 which establishes the legal requirements for the education of ELLs in New York State, we continue to plan and implement high-quality services and supports for our English Language Learners. We offered Standalone ENL and Integrated ENL in 2016-2017, and will continue to offer both Standalone and Integrated ENL for the duration of this Language Allocation Policy in the future. Improvements that we are considering are the acquisition of new textbooks. This past school year we acquired new bilingual dictionaries and History textbooks in Spanish. We plan to look into purchasing new textbooks in Spanish for Sciences and Math. We also have many programs this year such as Visual Arts, Theater Arts, Science Research and Literacy classes, and Problem Solving. We have advisory classes where the students' social emotional needs are met, and where students are educated about graduation and college entrance requirements. Our ENL students are grouped together by grade in this advisory class. Our students go on field trips; this past school year the ELLs visited the Freedom Tower to learn about the history of immigration in New York City. In 11th grade and 12th grade there are college visit trips and the ELLs go with their monolingual peers. There are now monthly, school-wide local college tours. Our ELLs participate in all these activities, offering them ways to increase English language acquisition, social and academic vocabulary, and to participate in cultural activities. Additionally we had ELLs participate ina range of summer programs this past summer such as ELL Writing Institute, SAT Prep for ELLs, and International Rescue Committee's Refugee Summer Youth Academy. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? Not Applicable - We have never had a bilingual program because we do not have the required minimum number of students to start one. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. A review of school programs shows that our ELLs are afforded equal access to all school programs. They participate in a rigorous school day. They will attend the mandated number of periods of ENL (Standalone, Integrated ENL and Flexibility) to meet New York State CR Part 154 guidelines for ELLs. They participate in school trips, after school activities and sports, credit recovery, and Regents test prep. A review of the latest NYC Department of Education School Survey stated that there is a consensus among the teachers at Rockaway Collegiate High School that, "My school ensures English Language Learners receive the same curriculum as their non-English Language Learner peers with appropriate supports, i.e., scaffolds, native language, and culturally responsive instruction." This is a testimony to how RCHS affords our ELLs equal access to all school programs. We have two Spanish-speaking teachers who offer Regents prep and tutoring programs after school as well. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. Instructional materials used to support ELLs are glossaries, content area textbooks, texts in the native language, bilingual dictionaries, ENL teacher prepared materials (modified assignments, readings, and assessments), ENL texts, novels, short stories, articles, newspapers, SMART boards, access to all library materials, ENL websites and listening skills materials, CDs, dialogues, data projectors, computers, scanners, and printers. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? 5  Rockaway Collegiate currently has an ENL Program and native language support is provided by the classroom teacher when possible, by the use of bilingual glossaries and dictionaries, and interaction with Spanish speaking and other staff who are bilingual or multilingual. We also have staff members teaching the content areas who are bilingual who offer native language support. For example, Mr. V. Torres supports ENL Spanish speaking students in ELA and US History class. Ms. N. Ochoa provides materials in Spanish for Spanish-speaking students in her Global History class. Mr. D. Serrano is able to provide instructions and interact with students in Spanish in his ELA class. We currently only have the ENL program model. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. Required services and resources correspond to ELLs' ages and grade levels. Our ELLs are placed in an age-appropriate setting so they receive the content area instruction all students their age receive. They utilize all the resources available to RCHS. In particular, our advisory prgram is a great social emotional support for our ENL students. We provide a Saturday prep program with programs of great interest to high school ages and grade levels. We have exciting and challenging programs such as Dance and Theater and Visual Arts. Our ENL teacher is Spanish-speaking and our CBO, Partnership with Children, counts on several Spanish-speaking staff members. As 34 of our 40 ELLs have a home language of Spanish, this is a great support for our students. This year and last, our CBO has collaborated with the ENL teacher and administration to help improve relationships among ENL peers. PWC mediated conflicts and formed a ENL girls group that met during students' lunch and provided an outlet for students to discuss and social emotional issues they were having. Additionally, students have access to mental health counseling at school through Sheltering Arms. Although the counselors do not speak Spanish, they have been trained on using over-the-phone interpretation, and many ENL students have accessed their services throughout the school year. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? Instructional materials used to support ELLs are glossaries, content area textbooks, texts in the native language, bilingual dictionaries, ENL teacher prepared materials, ENL texts, novels, short stories, articles, newspapers, SMART boards, access to all library materials, ENL websites and listening skills materials, CDs, dialogues, data projectors, computers, scanners, and printers. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). Newly enrolled ELLs had been participating in our July Orientation Program, an activity that takes place before the beginning of the academic school year, and students are provided with much information about RCHS and school programs. As for students that enroll throughout the school year we have a newly created "Student Orientation Committee." This committee is made up of current ELL/ENL students who serve as student tour guides and buddies for newly enrolled students. The newly enrolled students also meet with the ENL teacher to obtain materials in the native language and for any support they need wih an "open-door" policy. The students also have interactions with the guidance counselor, Assistant Principal Woods-Powell, and with our CBO, Partnership with Children. We encourage our newly enrolled students to feel welcome and know they will receive the assistance they need when they need it. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? ELLs are offered language electives at RCHS. These include the study of Spanish at this time. They also use extensive language skills, skills in listening, speaking, reading and writing, in other elective classes, for example visual arts, dance, the arts and in elective Regents prep classes. These elective classes offer language development as well as being of high interest for our ELLs. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? 6 Not applicable Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? Rockaway Collegiate High School has a highly developed Professional Development plan. All teachers of ELLs actively participate in grade level professional learning communities as measured by collaboration, co-planning, inter-visitations and peer feedback sessions. Research has shown that the professional learning community is a powerful staff development approach and a potent strategy for school change and improvement. Lead teachers lead the grade team meetings and have created a master schedule that allows for the team to meet together on a weekly basis for a minimum of 90 minutes. In this setting they collaborate to establish a case conferencing protocol, addressing the needs of our current ELLs and transitional ELLs. They design and implement protocols for fine-tuning the curriculum, evaluating student work, and support the development of college prep. This in-depth professional development block ensures more than the minimum hours of ELL training for staff are met as the ENL teacher and ENL coordinator offer strategies and specific professional development topics at these meetings which include the entire RCHS staff. Records are maintained of meeting the requirement of ELL training for all staff as part of our school-wide professional development and support for school staff program. A log and feedback are also provided to the Assistant Principals in reference to Department Conferences twice weekly which are delineated on teacher programs. Our professional development program begins in early September for the entire RCHS staff. During these PD sessions the following items were on the agenda: the new teacher evaluation system: Danielson framework, initial planning and goal setting, measures of student learning/MOSL, citywide instructional expectations, the Common Core State Standards and how they are to be implemented in the content areas, curriculum mapping, grade team as well as content area team implementation incorporating ELLs, ENL students and those students with IEPs, school culture protocols and general response protocols. Professional development is on-going at RCHS, well-developed, and is meeting the needs of our staff as they implement the CCSS. The calendar of PD dates, evidence of training, materials provided, agendas, sign-in sheets and evaluations of these many PD sessions are available from our Assistant Principal, Ms. Jean Woods-Powell, who is the AP of the Professional Development Program as well as our English as a New Language Program at RCHS. The ENL Coordinator, Ms. Kahn, and the ENL teacher, Ms. Pinkerton, provide support for teachers of our ELLs as they transition from middle school to our high school. For example, our ENL coordinator ensures that all content area teachers, as well as students, have New York State Education glossaries in target languages for their particular content area. We provide staff with the opportunity to share content area vocabulary with the ENL teachers who provide sample lesson plans and ideas that include scaffolding, visual support and other methods to ensure that our English Language Learners achieve. Our coordinator has an open-door policy and meets with staff members to offer strategies for ELL students. Rockaway Collegiate High School has made the professional development component an integral part of the school culture incorporating how to differentiate instruction for our English Language Learners and offer scaffolding in the content areas. RCHS also provides staff development to support staff in assisting ELLs as they will transition to “college and beyond.” There has been turn-key training from Professional Development at the Options Institute/Goddard Riverside CC, where “Matching Students to Post Secondary Opportunities,” specifically programs such as CUNY’s Language Immersion Program (CLIP), might be an option for our ELLs as they apply to universities. The ENL/ELL Department also provides training during RCHS Professional Development sessions, for example, strategies to work with ELL students in mainstream classes. There is also co-planning, co-teaching and feedback on how our ELLs are progressing. We currently have 18 ELLs in our ENL program; as they are in different classes, and different grades, there are grade Professional Development and subject area Professional Development meetings. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include 7  how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. Rockaway Collegiate High School has a highly developed Professional Development plan. All teachers of ELLs actively participate in professional learning communities which foster collaboration, co-planning, intervisitations and peer feedback sessions. Research has shown that the professional learning community is a powerful staff development approach and a potent strategy for school change and improvement. Lead teachers and administrators lead the department meetings and teachers meet together in departments 3 times weekly. In this setting they collaborate to compile and analyze assessment data, and address the needs of our SWDs and current and transitional ELLs. They design and implement protocols for fine-tuning the curriculum, evaluating student work, and adjusting instruction accordingly. This in-depth professional development series ensures more than the minimum hours of ELL training for staff are met. Additionally, the ENL teacher offers strategies and specific professional development topics at weekly professional development meetings which include the entire RCHS staff. Our professional development program begins in early September for the entire RCHS staff. During these PD sessions the following items have been on the agenda: Danielson framework, initial planning and goal setting, measures of student learning/MOSL, citywide instructional expectations, the Common Core State Standards and how they are to be implemented in the content areas, curriculum mapping, grade team as well as content area team implementation incorporating ELLs, ENL students and those students with IEPs, school culture protocols and general response protocols. Professional development is ongoing at RCHS, and is meeting the needs of our staff as they implement the CCSS. The calendar of PD dates, evidence of training, materials provided, agendas, sign-in sheets and evaluations of these many PD sessions are available from our administration as well as our English as a New Language Program at RCHS. We provide staff with the opportunity to share content area vocabulary with the ENL teacher who provides ideas that include scaffolding, visual support, vocabulary strategies, and other methods to ensure that our English Language Learners achieve. Rockaway Collegiate High School has made the professional development component an integral part of the school culture, and always incorporates strategies to differentiate instruction for our English Language Learners.RCHS also provides staff development to support staff in assisting ELLs as they will transition to “college and beyond.” This year, the US History teacher, Ms. S. Foderaro, attended the Content and Academic Language Institute professional development series with the ENL teacher at the Borough Field Support Center. The PD offered a wealth of materials and strategies to engage ELLs with the social studies curriculum.The ENL/ELL Department also provides training during RCHS Professional Development sessions, for example, strategies to work with ELL students in mainstream classes. There is also co-planning, co-teaching and feedback on how our ELLs are progressing. We currently have 38 ELLs in our ENL program; as they are in different classes, and different grades, there are grade team professional development meetings as well as subject area professional development meetings which always include ELL personnel at our school. The ENL teacher also provides training during RCHS Professional Development sessions. Folders with research, strategies, and data analysis for our current ELLs and an open discussion are provided. There is also co-planning and feedback on how our ELLs are progressing. Since we have 40 ELLs in our ESL program, and they are spread out over 4 grades, grade PDs and subject area PDs always include ELL personnel at our school. For example, a past professional development workshop for January was centered around Marzano's 6-step vocabulary procedure. The ENL teacher presented specific strategies that would be high impact and should be used with our English Language Learners. At another PD, AP Woods-Powell presented sample lesson modifications for each content area and had teachers determine which ENL level the modification would be most appropriate for. This was so teachers could have a more complete understanding of what type of modifications they should be incorporating into their lessons. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of our Parent Involvement Policy is to develop a program that ensures effective involvement of the parents and community at RCHS.RCHS has an Open House in the fall inviting the parents of ELLs for an ELL specific workshop where we discuss the goals of the program, language development progress, the results of exams, language development needs and how 8  parents can encourage their children to develop language at home. We invite parents to many activities, for example, dance performances, art showcases, Multicultural Night, presentations, "Game Night," and shows where we keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. All parents, including parents of our English Language Learners, are encouraged to actively participate in the School Leadership Team, Parent Association and Title I Parent Committee and are welcomed members of our school community. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. ELL parent involvement includes the parents of all our ENL students. The administration and staff have been excellent at outreach to all parents as well as the parents of of ELLs and RCHS has included parents in many special evenings, for example, Game Night, Multicultural Night, College and Career Readiness Workshops, Curriculum Night, dance performances, art showcases, and many other celebratory activities where parents become involved in our school. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Rockaway Collegiate High School is now entering its 7th year and we have grades 9, 10, 11, and 12. We currently have 40 English Language Learner students representing 5 different language groups: Arabic, Haitian Creole, Fulani, Punjabi, and Spanish. Our students are showing continued progress. An analysis of those students with both a 2016 or earlier NYSESLAT/NYSITELL score and a 2017 NYSESLAT score indicate growth for 15 out of 25 students, with 10 out of 25 having a stable score. We have seen some outstanding gains, most particularly in the students at the lower levels who received standalone ENL classes. To address the slow or stagnant progress in the more advanced ENL students, we restructured the Integrated ENL push-in program for the 2016-2017 instructional year, and saw incredible results on the January, 2017 Regents. We had two current ELLs and one Commanding-level ELL with an IEP, all 12th graders, who fulfilled all credit and Regents requirements and graduated on time in June, 2017. We are expanding programs for all students, including ELLs, in the Arts, Dance, Dramatic Literature, Research Writing, the History of World Leaders, and many other courses, and in sports activities. We have advisory classes where the students' voices are heard. Our motto is "To College and Beyond," and we provide college visits to all students during our students' academic tenure here at Rockaway Collegiate High School. And, as previously stated in our school survey, "Our teachers agree that Rockaway Collegiate High School ensures that our English Language Learners receive the same curriculum as their non-English Language Learner peers with appropriate supports of scaffolds, native language, and culturally responsive instruction." RCHS sets high standards for student work, has clear measures of progress for student achievement throughout the year, and does a good job of supporting students who are at risk for dropping out. We will monitor and support our ELLs and look forward to continued growth in all the modalities and success for the 2017-2019 school years. 9  0 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Carol Ying, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 1  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: Rockaway Collegiate H.S. School DBN: 27Q351 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Frances De Sanctis Title Principal Jean Woods-Powell Assistant Principal Jennifer Rondon Parent Coordinator Kerry Pinkerton ENL/Bilingual Teacher Michelle Slaughter Parent Rosaline Fernandez/F.L. Teacher/Subject Area n/a n/a n/a Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach Henrietta Dixon School Counselor Elaine Lindsey Laura Brown n/a n/a n/a Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member n/a Other n/a Other n/a Other n/a Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 09/29/17 09/29/17 09/29/17 09/29/17 09/29/17 09/29/17 09/29/17 09/29/17 09/29/17 09/29/17 09/29/17 09/29/17 09/29/17 09/29/17 09/29/17 2  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 27Q351 School Name: Rockaway Collegiate High School Superintendent: Elaine Lindsey The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Nancy Crocker ENL Coordinator Yes Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. Data and methodologies used to assess our school’s written translation and oral interpretation needs include a review of the Home Language Information Survey (HLIS), specifically Part III, and ATS data, which indicate the languages spoken at home. Specifically, we run the ATS report RPOB, the Place of Birth Report, with a home language indicator. This tells us all the home languages at RCHS. Our students also fill out Emergency Contact cards and we note the request for school information to be sent to our parent community in the language they request. We currently have 9 home languages of our students including our ELL students: Arabic, English, Haitian Creole, French, Bengali, Polish, Spanish, Punjabi and Fulani. Disaggregated data is also available in our school’s Language Allocation Policy document. Our Parent Coordinator will also be consulted as to the needs of Rockaway Collegiate High School and translations. Our Parent-Teacher Association will have input into this process. A school-wide survey may be sent home with the students as a needs assessment. Requests by staff are immediately addressed and RCHS ensures our parents are provided all information in a timely manner in the language they understand. 3  2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Arabic Bengali Chinese English French Fulani Haitian Creole Mandarin Polish Spanish 6 8 1 414 3 1 0 0 1 77 1.17 1.57 0.2 81.2 0.59 0.2 0 0 0.2 15.07 7 7 0 415 3 1 1 1 1 75 1.36 1.37 0 81.37 0.59 0.2 0.19 0.2 0.2 14.71 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. None Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families Announcements about parent-teacher conferences September, March Open School Notices September, March Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. Submit NYCDOE Public Schools Translation Request and for non-covered languages we can use the DOE vendor "The Big Word." Submit NYCDOE Public Schools Translation Request and for non-covered languages we can use the DOE vendor "The Big Word." 4  Invitations to our Open House and the many parent activities, for example Game Night and Multicultural Night New York State and New York City testing dates (for example the LOTE exam), New York State Regents examinations information as well as when we hold our test-prep sessions. September, October, December, TBD November, April Lunch Forms September Letters home regarding immunizations and other enrollment-related issues. September and ongoing as needed Letters verifying student enrollment in school for tax purposes (by parent request) February, March, April Parent Notification Letters for ELLs detailing their services for the upcoming school year September School electronic notices through Skedula Ongoing Submit NYCDOE Public Schools Translation Request and for non-covered languages we can use the DOE vendor "The Big Word." Submit NYCDOE Public Schools Translation Request and for non-covered languages we can use the DOE vendor "The Big Word." Translated lunch forms ordered in Spring 2017 Submit NYCDOE Public Schools Translation Request and for non-covered languages we can use the DOE vendor "The Big Word." Submit NYCDOE Public Schools Translation Request and for non-covered languages we can use the DOE vendor "The Big Word." Submit NYCDOE Public Schools Translation Request and for non-covered languages we can use the DOE vendor "The Big Word." Automatically translated through Skedula. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide Parent-Teacher conferences September, November, March, May Parent Workshops (ex. CBOs, family nights, etc.). Ongoing Individual Student Parent Conferences Ongoing interpretation service(s)? Spanish-speaking teachers and staff will interpret for parents, as will Haitian-Creole speaking staff members. For all other languages, teachers and staff will utilize over the phone interpretation. Spanish-speaking teachers and staff will interpret for parents, as will Haitian-Creole speaking staff members. For all other languages, teachers and staff will utilize over the phone interpretation. Spanish-speaking teachers and staff will interpret for parents, as will Haitian-Creole speaking staff members. For all other languages, 5  teachers and staff will utilize over the phone interpretation. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. Staff members who are proficient in the varied languages and robocalls in the language of preference. For any non-covered languages, we will use phone translation services. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. All staff is informed of options for translation and interpretation services, and teachers are instructed to speak with the LAC and/or the ENL teacher if they have questions or require assistance. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) Rockaway Collegiate High School will fulfill Section VII of CR A-663 which specifies notification requirements for translation and interpretation services. Our main office, F272, houses our Family Services office and our Parent Coordinator has an office next door and specifically deals with Parent Outreach. We assist any parent whose primary language is a language other than English and who may need language assistance services. Parents are greeted by posted language interpretation signs. These signs are provided in the covered languages indicating the availability of interpretation services. We currently have faculty members who speak Spanish, French, Italian, and Haitian. We can also obtain translations of parental notification letters from the DOE website. We utilize the Department of Education's website for information in each of the covered languages concerning the rights of parents to translation and interpretation services and how to access such services. Notices particular to our school can be sent to the DOE Translation and Interpretation Unit for translation in targeted languages and/or translated by our faculty. We also notify parents and staff that over-the-phone interpretation services are available to all New York City Department of Education schools and offices. These hours are extended during Parent-Teacher Conferences and can be accessed at 718-752-7373 ext.4. These actions fulfill our parental notification requirements for translation and interpretation services and our Parent Coordinator has ensured that the “Checklist of Notification Requirements,” is in effect. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? 6  Our school, RCHS, will put in place mechanisms to gather feedback from parents which will include the parent survey, response to notices, and during formal and informal parent interviews and participation in school-wide activities. This will be ongoing and will culminate in parent responses to our school survey. 7 
