 09X042 School Name: P.S. 042 CLAREMONT Principal: LUCIA ORDUZ-CASTILLO 2018-19 CEP-CS 1  Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC)   School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information P.S. The Claremont Community School 09x042 320900010042 PK-5 School Number (DBN): 1537 Washington Avenue Bronx, NY 10457 718-583-7366 Phone Number: 718-583-7345 Fax: Lucia Orduz-Castillo lorduzcastillo@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Lucia Orduz-Castillo Email Address: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): Yolande Twiggs Farja Marshall Gregory Muir FarjaMarshall - - TashakaWynter, Community School Director, Bronxworks CBO Representative: District Information Geographical District: 09 Superintendent’s Office Address: Leticia Rosario Superintendent: 1245 Washington Avenue Bronx NY 10457 Lrosario2@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718 579 7143 Phone Number: 718 410 7017 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC)   Team 8 FSC: Executive Director’s Office Address: Jose Ruiz Executive Director: 1230 Zerega Avenue, Bronx, NY 10462 jruiz2@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 7188287776 Phone Number: 7188286395 Fax:   Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Lucia Orduz-Castillo Yolande Twiggs Farja Marshall NA FarjaMarshall NA NA Sue Blackwood Gregory Muir Tara Doherty Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/ Teacher Member/ Teacher   Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) BethzaidaRivera Monica Valencia Krystal Emperial NA NA Member/ Parent Member/Teacher Member/ Teacher Member/ Parent Member/ Paraprofessional Member/Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/   Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with   the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement   Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? The mission of our community school is to provide a supportive environment for our students and families in the form of academics, enrichment, health and nutrition and college and career preparation. If we remove barriers to learning, we can support our students' educational success while building stronger families and empowering our community.   2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. P.S. 42 Claremont Community School is a PK-5 school with 400 enrolled students. 56% of our enrolled students are Hispanic and 41% are of African-American descent. 25% of our students have Individualized Education Plans. 15% of our student body is classified as English Language Learners. 22% of students reside in temporary housing. We became a Community School in September of 2014 through receipt of the Attention Improvement Dropout Prevention Grant. As a Community School, our mission is to provide a supportive environment for our students and families in the form of academics, enrichment, health and nutrition and college and career preparation. Partnered with community-based organization Bronxworks, we were able to increase our yearly attendance average by 2.5 percent in the 2015-2016 school year and by 1.5 percent in the 2016-2017 school year. As a result of Community School efforts, our students have been recipients of winter coats, designer eye wear, running sneakers, dentistry services, a full-time asthma case manager, a full-time social worker, and other physical and mental health services that should alleviate attendance problems. Our school also offers food donations at subsidized costs to parents each month. P.S. 42 has a total of 73 staff members including three administrators and two coaches. We have a total of four model teachers through the Learning Partners Program and the Office of Teacher Recruitment and Quality . There are 23 classes, 3 of which are self-contained classes. Students receive visual arts, music, science, and physical education & health outside of their classrooms. Each school week begins with a school community meeting in the auditorium where students present on the PBIS expectations, and where at least once a month, “students of the month” are honored in front of the community alongside their parents. The school day itself begins with a 10 minute homeroom period where teachers have an opportunity to welcome students and check-in with them through the use of restorative circles. During this time, children have an opportunity to share how they are feeling and teachers can take steps early in the day to respond as necessary to a student in need. Our school had the most growth in the DTSDE Tenets Student Social Emotional Developmental Health and Family and Community Engagement. Now in our fourth year of full implementation of PBIS, we have seen a reduced number of incidents. Our staff shows over an 80% level of commitment to PBIS, per the PBIS Benchmarks of Quality Survey. Students receive “cougar paws” when displaying one of the three PBIS expectations, which they use to later redeem a priced prize from the cougar cart. Through PBIS, we also have a parent incentive program as well rewarding parents for their level of participation in their child's education, and a staff incentive program to reward those going above and beyond. 0  In addition to PBIS, students’ social-emotional well-being is supported through the use of restorative practices, such as daily implementation of restorative circles. Our strategic partnering with Astor Children and Family Services, who has established a satellite offering of services in our building. We have hired an additional full-time social worker through our CBO Bronxworks using AIDP funds. Additionally, we have a full-time guidance counselor and an F-status guidance counselor whom work with our mandated and at-risk students. We are partnered with the Institute for Understanding Behavior (IUB) which is a DOE/UFT organization that provides professional development and trainings to schools in restorative practices, Therapeutic Crisis Intervention (TCIS), and classroom management strategies. Our school will continue its work with the Child Study Team (CST). The CST was established last year and it convenes weekly to look closely at students who are having academic and/or social-emotional difficulty, and have been referred by their teacher. The team, composed of the school psychologist, school social worker, guidance counselor, IEP teacher, speech teachers, and family worker, meet to study the behavior the child is presenting and come up with an action plan to alleviate negative behaviors and/or support the child academically. The referred students’ teachers are periodically invited to present their findings, provide additional information, and provide updates on the child’s progress. Each child referred to the CST has a case manager who ensures that the information needed is gathered, all stakeholders –including parents - and that the action plan is implemented. Administrative decisions such as the implementation of PBIS, the purposeful staffing and use of mental health staff, and strategic partnering with organizations and use of their resources have helped to provide a more stable and safe environment for our students. (DTSDE 5, Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health) Other strategic administrative decisions have been made to improve the level of instruction and pedagogy, and thereby, positively affect student achievement. This past school year, our school's accountability status was deemed "Good Standing" by the state. We believe that we were able to remove our school from the state;s Focus list by identifying "pushable" students who could meet state standards and providing them with targeted supports including an after school enrichment program, and close monitoring of their school attendance. Most recently, after two years of participation as a partner school in the Learning Partner Program, our school has been chosen to serve as a host school. In this triad, our school will be partnered with P.S. 73 from District 9 and P.S. 246 from District 10 with a focus on Mathematics. All three schools will participate in intervisits to one another schools and explore a problem of practice together through inquiry-based approach.. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. -We have over 25% of students with Individualized Educational Plans. This has resulted in ensuring that students are in their least restrictive setting, flexibly grouped when possible, and included in departmentalization, and after school programs. We also have a high (30%) STH population which requires us to monitor attendance carefully and provide different resources to families through our partnership with CBO Bronxworks. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. 1  The area in which we made most progress over the past year is in Collaborative Teachers. As per our most recent Quality Review 2016-2017, teacher teams were rated at well-developed. This was substantiated by the 2018 Learning Environment Survey in which close to 90% of staff said, "teachers say that they had opportunities to work productively with colleagues at their school on professional development."(Q8c) It was the teacher team work that helped to move the instruction in the school. Teacher teams came together to collaboratively plan, make adjustments to curriculum and to differentiate instruction for the various levels in classrooms. This resulted in a decrease in Level 1 students and a substantial increase in Level 3s & 4s primarily in Math. Our areas of focus for the school year continue to be rigorous instruction, specifically continuing to strengthen our pedagogical skills in questioning to yield a higher level of student talk and subsequently, student engagement. 2  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 09X042 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration PK,0K,01,02,03,04,05 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 439 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language 16 16 24 % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 35 26 24 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) % Attendance Rate 100.0% 98.6% % Reduced Lunch 12.8% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.2% 58.1% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 0.2% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 5.57 3% 31% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 30.2% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 59% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A NO N/A NO NO Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A YES N/A NO YSH Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A NO N/A N/A NO High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 80 78 91.1% 1.1% 26.7% 40.8% 0.7% 0.2% 4 21% 6.8 30.9% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No YES N/A N/A N/A NO NO N/A N/A N/A YSH N/A N/A N/A N/A NO N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 3  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. According to the most recent Quality Review 2016-2017, one of our school's strengths is team work and collaboration among teachers. Teachers engage in structured professional collaborations on teams using an inquiry approach. There are shared leadership structures in our building which promotes capacity building and teachers learning from one another. This work resulted in a 14% increase in math proficiency and a 4% increase in ELA proficiency according to the state exams. Another strength identified is school culture, specifically our ability to communicate high expectations to staff, students, and families. As important are the resources and supports we have put in place to ensure that we achieve those expectations. Finally, another strength identified in the QR is our ability to establish systems for improvement that are focused, data-based goals, and tracked for progress. Priority needs this year include pedagogy - teachers' ability to plan for questions that promote student thinking and their ability to establish opportunities for student talk in a lesson. This priority need was established based on the Advance observation ratings of the 2017-2018 school year, showing most of our teachers rating at developing in competency 3b in at least two observation rounds. This is reiterated through the spring's Learning Environment Survey in which 48% of teachers say thats tudents build on each other's ideas during class discussion (Q19a). Another priority need is continued work on differentiation which remains the school's focus. Although we decreased the number of level 1 students by 8% in ELA and 14% in math, we still have over 40% of students at Level 1s in Math and over 30% of students at Level 1s in ELA. For this reason, it is imperative that we continue to modify instruction so that we can continue to decrease number of level 1s and narrow the gap. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 55% of our students will be reading at or above grade level as per Fountas and Pinnell Reading Assessment, and there will be a 8% decrease in the number of level 1s on the 2018-2019 NYS ELA exam as compared to the 2017-2018 exam, as a result of targeted instruction. 4  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Collaborative Lesson Planning during weekly meetings to ensure alignment of objectives to standards, multiple entry points and rigorous tasks for students of varying subgroups, including ELLs and SWDs, and at different levels in both ELA, and continued professional development for classroom teachers in both ELA and in which small group instruction is a focus. Additionally, use of inquiry based approaches in team meetings to target specific standards and subgroups of students. As part of an inquiry cycle, teachers will participate in intervisitations between classrooms to see one another’s practice, apply learning in own classroom and provide one another with feedback. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All teachers September – June, Weekly Principal 2 Assistant Principals 1 ELA Coach 3 Literacy Consultants 1 Sped. Coach Classroom Teachers K-5 ESL Teacher SETSS Teacher Principal 2 Assistant Principals 4 Classroom Teachers 1 October-April, 2x a week October –June, 2x a week Inclusive of Special Education students. Grades 2-4 Lowest 1/3 not inclusive of Special Education Students. Grades 3-5 Afterschool Enrichment Program– academic intervention will be offered in small groups to support the students in remedial skills in both ELA and test sophistication skills. Level 1 students (1.60>) Tiered instruction for students during the school day to support acquisition of remedial skills in literacy using Fountas and Pinnell Leveled Literacy Intervention program. Tiered instruction for students during the school day to support acquisition of remedial skills in math, targeting instruction of math fluencies and building problem solving skills. 5  October -June, 2x a week Saturday Academy in ELA – academic intervention will be offered in small groups targeting specific skills within a focus area to increase number of proficient students on the NYS ELA exam. Grade 3-5 November-April, weekly Principal 2 Assistant Principals 3 Classroom Teachers Dual-Capacity monthly workshops for parents to present skill of the month and resources to work with children at home. Parents will be introduced to the skill of the month on the first Tuesday of each month and will be presented with data to show student/class growth in performance on that skill at the following session. All teachers October Principal January Grade Chairs Parents March Teachers PK-5 Parent Coordinator 4 hours Open House Community School Director 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Parents are invited to be part of academic parent teacher teams that focus on one particular skill each month. Outreach is made via school messenger, fliers, and newsletter/website. Parents attend Teach Me Tuesday - a quarterly workshop in which they are presented with data on a particular skill respective to their child and child's class; they learn an activity that targets that skill; they prepare the activity so they can use it at home with their child; and when returning the following month, they are presented with fresh data which should show gains in student performance on that skill. Key personnel that will support include classroom teachers, school leaders, Parent Coordinator and Community School Director. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Purchase of Teachers’ College professional development including year-long support with staff developer; additional tickets to workshops and participation in select study groups; per session for enrichment program in after school hours and Saturday academy to take place; allocation of Monday professional development time to go towards 6  planning. Per session at training rate for teachers to attend the workshops; per diem to provide coverage for teachers attending the workshops. Mailings and School Messenger to advertise parent workshops. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. F&P reading levels – percentage of students reading below grade level as per January’s administration will decrease by 25% from October's administration. Percentage of students reading below grade level as per March’s administration will decrease by 15% from January’s administration. Percentage of students reading below grade level as per June’s administration will decrease by 15% from March’s administration. There will be a decrease by 4% of students on grades 3-5 who score a level 1 on the NYS simulation ELA exam in December. There will be a decrease by 4% of students on grades 3-5 who score a level 1 on the NYS simulation ELA in February. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) Fountas and Pinnell Running Records - November, January, March, May NYS ELA Simulation exams Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 7  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? According to the most recent Quality Review 2016-2017, school leaders consistently communicate high expectations to the entire staff and to the school community in general. This was reiterated in the 2018 NYC School Survey 100% of staff states that school leadership states clear expectations. There is also evidence that parents work with the school to improve opportunities for their children as well as consistent school-home communication, and multiple opportunities for parents to become involved. . It was said that PBIS program outlines the school's values around academic and parent behaviors and that student voice is welcomed and respected. An area of challenge as a school is our student attendance. This past school year we increased our yearly attendance decreased by 1.5% - from 92.5 to 91%. Our number of chronically absent students has decreased by half. However, we continue to have an average attendance below 95% and a high lateness percentage average of 18%. Our need is to use all of our resources, including AIDP funds, to strengthen our attendance and increase student presence in our school on a more consistent basis. Next steps include expansion of extracurricular activities for our students as well as continued implementation of school services to support social and emotional development of students. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, the school’s yearly attendance average will have increased by 2% totaling 93% for the school year in comparison to last year’s attendance average of 91% as a result of student mentoring. 8  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional  programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Strategic use of AIDP funds as a community school including alignment of CBO afterschool program Bronxworks to community school Bronxworks; hiring of social worker; additional extra-curricular activities for students offered before the start of the school day. Entire school community September 2018 - June 2019 Principal Community School Director Daily Parent Coordinator UFT Chapter Rep Social Worker Teacher on CST Teachers Paraprofessionals Principal Community School Director Continued implementation of attendance inquiry with subgroups of students to improve attendance of students by cycle. Subgroup of students with chronic absenteeism September 2018 - June 2019 Parents of chronically absent students will be asked to attend dual-capacity trainings once a month so they can be trained on the skill of the month and work with their child at home on that skill. Additionally, these parents will be asked to attend conferences to discuss the absenteeism every six weeks. Daily Parent Coordinator Attendance Teacher School Aides Subgroup of students with chronic absenteeism Quarterly Principal November 2018 January 2019 Classroom Teachers Grade Chairs 9  March 2019 Community School Director Parent Coordinator Monitoring of attendance of school's lowest third (to include ENLSand SWDs gr. 3-5), pairing of students with Americorps staff to serve as a mentor for these students. ENLs SWDs October 2018 June 2019, Daily 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Attendance Teacher Social Worker Principal Community School Director Attendance Teacher Americorps Staff How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Parents are notified daily of children's attendance via Kinvolved, School Messenger, and in writing at the beginning and mid-points of the school year. Key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight include the Community School Director, the Community School Social Worker, the Attendance Teacher, the Community School Case Manager and other members of the attendance team including mentors, pupil accounting secretary and principal. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Incentives for student attendance including gift cards, certificates, and other prizes. Per session for attendance team members and other staff facilitate parental meetings, student activities and extracurricular activities as incentives for students. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, daily attendance average will be at 93% reflecting an increase of 2% compared to previous school year. Our lateness average will have decreased by 4% reflecting compared to last school year. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. 0  Daily Attendance Average; daily lateness Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 1  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Our school’s professional culture continues to improve. As noted in the most recent Quality Review (2016-2017, page 2), the majority of teachers are engaged in structured, inquiry-based professional collaborations. Distributed leadership structures are in place that promote the achievement of school goals. This is reiterated through the 2018 NYC School survey in which 85% of teachers say that their professional development experiences this year have included enough time to think carefully about, try and evaluate new ideas (Q10b) All staff members receive professional development in instructional areas. Staff members are publicly recognized via shout outs. School leaders have created an inclusive climate that is beneficial to both adult and student learning (PPO Feedback 2016-2017). Additionally, as also noted, teachers participate in intervisitations and provide feedback to colleagues and teachers who participate in off-site professional development assume responsibility for turn-keying their learnings with colleagues through workshops and other professional sharing. Our challenge in this area lies in creating instructional practices that lead to multiple points of access for all students. As noted in the PPO feedback, it is our goal to strengthen teacher pedagogy in the use of teaching strategies consistently to provide multiple entry points into the curricula so that all learners, including ELLs and SWDs are engaged in challenging tasks and demonstrate higher-order thinking skills in student work products and high level discussions. This is reiterated in the 2018 NYC School Survey in which less than 50% of teachers say that students respond to challenging questions in class. (Q20g). Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June of 2019, 75% of teachers will rate "Effective" in Competency 3B– Questioning and discussion - of the Danielson Teaching Framework in at least two observation rounds as a result of support provided to teachers to plan for higher order questioning and discussion techniques. 2  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Professional development in lesson planning for math and reading and writing, inclusive of guided reading, at the elementary school level through Math Consultant, Teachers College Consultants, and Generation Ready Consultant. Use of teacher team meetings to plan for a targeted group of at-risk children and to address a deficit in a standard as per the NYS ELA and Math exams' instructional reports. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All teachers September - June Principal Assistant Principal ELA Coaches TC Staff Developer (K-2) and (3-5) Math Consultant Classroom teachers Generation Ready Consultant All teachers September - June Principal Assistant Principal Classroom teachers TLP trained participants Principal Assistant Principal Instructional Support Staff, including Sped. Coach Classroom teachers RBERN Consultant Professional development in strategies to address ENLsand SWD students under the guidance of a special education lead, a special education school improvement specialist, and a literacy consultant. Teachers of ENLsand SWDs September - June 3 Generation Ready Consultant TC Staff Developers Dual-Capacity quarterly workshops for parents to present skill of the month and resources to work with children at home. Parents will be introduced to the skill of the month on the first Tuesday of each month and will be presented with data to show student/class growth in performance on that skill at the following session. All parents September - June Principal Grade Chairs All Teachers Teachers PK-5 Parent Coordinator Community School Director 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Parents are invited to be part of academic parent teacher teams that focus on one particular skill each quarter. Key personnel needed to support this initiative include the parent coordinator, the community school director, the principal and grade chairs who lead each team. Outreach is made via school messenger, fliers, and newsletter/website. Parents attend Teach Me Tuesday - a monthly workshop in which they are presented with data on a particular skill respective to their child and child's class; they learn an activity that targets that skill; they prepare the activity so they can use it at home with their child; and when returning the following month, they are presented with fresh data which should show gains in student performance on that skill. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Purchase of professional development package with Teachers College Reading and Writing Project; purchase of partnership with Generation Ready for Aussie Consultant; purchase of professional development with Math Consultant. Per diem to cover teacher absence while they attend the professional development. Mailings and School Messenger to advertise parent workshops. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 4  35% of teachers will demonstrate growth in Advance data Competency 3B from the first round of Advance observations (October-November) to second round of Advance observations (December-January). Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Advance Ratings Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 5  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. An area of celebration for us is the use of resources including budget, space, coaches, and partnerships and other organizational decisions that are well-aligned, according to the PPO feedback, and support the school’s instructional goals and long-range action plans. We are noted for maximizing our organizational resources, making programming decisions and developing partnerships with organizations such as Reading Recovery and Generation Ready. There are distributive leadership strategies in place to promote teacher leadership and input from the staff. An area of challenge is the instructional core in our school. Specifically, it is imperative for us to strengthen our instructional practices in order to see increased student performance and progress. Our priority need is strengthening our instruction specifically in the area of questioning and discussion as per feedback from Superintendent visits and data from Advance ratings 2017 and 2018. Additionally, a priority need is to continue to differentiate our curriculum and identify access points for students who are performing at lower levels. This is evidenced by the number of Level 1s and 2s in our building per the NYS Math Exam (70%) and NYS ELA Exam (80%). Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, there will be a 25% decrease in the number of students scoring a level 1 on the New York State Math Exam as a result of participation as a host school in the Learning Partners Program. 6  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Increasing coherence of each component of math block - to include fluency, problem solving, math lesson and centers from grades K through 5th, and integration of I-ready instruction in small group. Grades K-5 September through June Principal 1 Assistant Principal Continued participation in the Learning Partners Program during the 2017-2018 school year and partnering with P.S. 73 (district 9) and PS 449 (district 9) to study a problem of practice in math in order to strengthen rigorous instruction in mathematics. Intervisitations to LPP model teachers’ classrooms to observe best practices and new strategies learned from partner and host schools. 2 Model Teachers in grades K, 3, 4, and 5, Math Lead and School Leadership All other instructional staff 1 Math Coach 1 Math AIS September through June 2 Model Teachers Principal 1 Assistant Principal 1 Math Coach 1 Math AIS 2 Model Teachers November through June Principal 1 Assistant Principal 1 Math Coach 1 Math AIS 2 Model Teachers 7 Participation of school leadership in professional development through one on one coaching provided by the New York City Leadership Academy, professional literature and workshops provided through the Association of Supervision and Curriculum Development, and district and borough field support center trainings. September through June Principal 1 Assistant Principal 1 Literacy Coach 1 Sped. Coach 1 Math Lead 1 Math Coach 2 Model Teachers Principal 1 Assistant Principal 1 Literacy Coach 1 Sped. Coach 1 Math Lead 1 Math Coach 2 Model Teachers Dual-Capacity monthly workshops for parents to present skill of the month and resources to work with children at home. Parents will be introduced to the skill of the month on the first Tuesday of each month and will be presented with data to show student/class growth in performance on that skill at the following session. Principal Parents All Teachers September through June Grade Chairs Teachers PK-5 Parent Coordinator Community School Director 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Parents are invited to be part of academic parent teacher teams that focus on one particular skill each month. Parents will also be invited to attend News With Orduz - monthly coffee hour with the principal - in which they will engage in structured learning walks with school leaders. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Per diem for absence coverage of model teachers and coverage for intervisitations. Math consultant, Christine King, fee. Purchase of I-ready software for K-5. Coverage of ASCD membership fees, including conference participation, and coverage of NYCLA coaching hours. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant 8  C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind X Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. There will be a decrease by 15% of students on grades 3-5 who score a level 1 on the NYS Math simulation exam in December. There will be a decrease by 25% of students on grades 3-5 who score a level 1 on the NYS simulation Math in February. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. NYS Math Simulation Exam. Internal Math Assessments. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 9  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. According to the most recent 2016-2017 Quality Review, the school has established high expectations that have been communicated to families via different means including newsletters, and monthly workshops such as Teach Me Tuesday. The review states that, "communication with families provides opportunities for them to partner in students’ education." While more parents may be attending parent events or while we have more parental events to offer, we would like to see more parents attend learning events so they are informed on how to support their children at home. Specifically, we would like to use Teach Me Tuesday - our parent engagement time - as a training of one specific skill that the parents can focus on at home with their children. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June of 2019, each of the school's 23 classes will have a minimum of 15% parental participation at Dual Capacity quarterly parent trainings that focus on specific skill-building at home. 0  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Dual-Capacity monthly workshops, “Teach Me Tuesdays” for parents to present skill of the month and resources to work with children at home. Parents will be introduced to the skill of the month on the first Tuesday of each month and will be presented with data to show student/class growth in performance on that skill at the following session. Professional Development for all teachers on dual-capacity in order to increase awareness of rationale, process, and key strategies to make these type of parent workshops successful. Continued offering of parent workshops on Saturdays and in the evenings on various topics that focus on how to support student achievement from home. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All parents September 2017 through June 2018 Principal Grade Chairs All teachers Teachers PK-5 All teachers Principals All parents September through June Parent Coordinator Community School Director Principal Assistant Principal Parent coordinator Community School Director Classroom Teachers Interventionists School Aides Principal Parent Coordinator Continual assessment of parents’ needs and adjustment of services offered through AIDP Community School funds. All parents September through June 1 Translation services offered to parents at workshops and events to encourage an increase in attendance and participation. All ESL parents Community School Director Social Worker UFT Chair Teachers November through April Parents on CST Assistant Principal ESL Teachers Parent Coordinator Community School Director 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. Bronxworks, CBO, is enlisted to help support family and community engagement through services made available through social worker and case worker. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Per session for translators; per session for teachers leading parent workshops; structured use of one Tuesday a month for “Teach me Tuesdays” Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February, there will be at least a 15% parent attendance at Teach Me Tuesday monthly events taking place the first Tuesday of every month as per event’s sign in sheets. 2  Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. SIGN-IN SHEETS Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 3  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Reading Level Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) Guided Reading Small Group Simulation/Benchmark performance NYS ELA Assessment 2016-2017 Strategy Group Small Group Ready Small Group Fundations Small Group Language Power Small Group I-Ready Diagnostic Imagine Learning Individual Strategy Reinforcement Mathematics NYS Math Assessment 2016-2017Percentile Go Math! Tier 2 & 3 Small Group or One-to-One Strategy Group Performance on Key Standard across multiple tests I-Ready Diagnostic Summative Assessments Summative Assessments Lab Reinforcement – shared Small Group Small Group Small Group Small Group Science Social Studies When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) During School Day, 3-5 times a week During School Day 2 times a week During School Day, 3 times a week During School Day, 2 times a week During school Day, 3 times a week Afterschool 2 times a week/Saturday School January-April During School Day, 3 times a week During School Day, 3 times a week During School Day, 3 times a week. During School Day, 1 time a week During School Day, 1 time a week 4 At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Child Study Team Referral; Parent Referral; Teacher Referral reading/shared writing Guidance Counselor (2) Social Worker (2)) School Psychologist (1) Astor Social Worker Small Group or One-to-One During School Day, 1 to 2 times a week 5  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. 100 Students Social-Emotional Services will be provided to STF population through guidance team as offered by the guidance counselor, a part-time guidance counselor, a CBO social worker, and social worker with Astor Children and Family Services. In addition to social-emotional services, children in temporary housing will also be provided with uniforms, school supplies, books. Our Community School offers vision screening and free eyewear for students in needs. We are able to provide students with winter coats as well as food donations through our school’s food pantry over holiday breaks. Parents of students are provided with resources through our CBO Bronxworks, specifically housing support, government benefits, health insurance access, etc. Students who are in temporary housing will have an opportunity to attend an after school program offering additional help in ELA and Mathematics on Wednesdays and Thursdays starting November and ending in May. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). NA 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 6  NA 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. NA 7  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. The school participates in NYCDOE job fairs to recruit and vet teacher candidates. With members of the instructional team, school leaders have teacher candidates go through a two-level interview process, including an interview and a demonstration lesson. The school supports new and experienced teachers by providing professional supports, including internal and external professional development. Our school offers coaching support via a staff developer and instructional leads. Professional development is also offered in cycles on Monday afternoons offering topics based on the need of the school (data derived from outside evaluations and in-house sources such as Advance ). Additionally, the school recently partnered with the New Teacher Center to build capacity within the building, training experienced teachers to serve as mentors for newer teachers. This model helps to build pedagogical skill and support teachers new to the profession, with the intention of retaining a higher number of teachers each year. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). The school’s professional development runs on a 4-6 week cycle, offering a variety of topics for teachers to work through in one cycle. Some of those topics are non-negotiables. For example, each cycle offers PD aligned to the instructional focus and the Common Core Shifts. Other topics include those that teachers have expressed interest in via surveys and those that teachers have volunteered to lead a workshop on. In addition to the professional development offered on Monday afternoons, teachers have the availability of a staff developer. Coaching cycles are provided by staff members as well as the instructional leads in the building. Coaching cycles include the observation of a lesson with feedback, co-planning, and/or co-teaching, modeling of a lesson, etc. Teachers also have the opportunity to visit a colleague’s classroom with their instructional support to see a lesson or a particular aspect of their colleague’s pedagogy. Additionally, teachers can participate in the professional development sessions offered by the Bronx Borough Field Support Center (BFSC), including Teacher Leadership Study Groups, ELL Series Workshops, Science Series Workshops, and Social Studies Workshops, among others. 8  School Leaders also attend monthly professional development via the district and BFSC, ASCD and are provided with targeted support by coaching offered by the New York City Leadership Academy. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). The preschool curriculum is aligned to the Common Core Pre-k standards. The predominant program, Land of the Letter People, teaches prekindergarteners through a cross-curricular, thematic based unit approach. Preschool children will have articulation preparation of their own into a kindergarten program. Vertical planning enables pre-kindergarten and kindergarten teachers to prepare for the students’ transitions. Speech provider and early intervention specialist will hold a parent workshop to provide parents with strategies to help develop their child academically and socially within the home. Students will have an opportunity to visit Kindergarten classrooms at the end of the school year. Our Pre-K social worker provides targeted support not only to students and their families but also to teachers. 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. Teachers collectively participate in the analysis of assessments through a collaborative inquiry based approach. Assessment data is collected and entered onto Schoolnet, and teachers and administration come together once a month to discuss data and instructional choices as a result of it. Teachers have been provided with professional development on how to interpret running record data, as well as how to engage in an inquiry cycle with the purposes of using data to inform instruction. They will continue to receive professional development on how to analyze data to inform instruction. In addition to the norming and scoring of the assessments, teachers participated on the MOSL committee and participated in the selection of MOSL assessments 9  4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Column B Section Reference(s) Section 5A-E Section 5A-E Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 412,989 0 0 0 2,600,253 X X 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use. 0   A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 1  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. PS 42X, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. P.S. 42 Claremont Community School will support parents and families of Title I students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; 2  ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; The school’s Parent Involvement Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability grade-level curriculum and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in 3  the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings, with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between /teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) School-Parent Compact (SPC) PS 42X, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for 4  improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; 5  Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering will all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; 6  ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; 7  ● always try my best to learn. 8  Addendum: Community School Partnerships Directions: The Community School (CS) strategy is directly aligned to the Framework for Great Schools. Community Schools bring schools and community partners together and integrate academics, health, youth development, and family engagement to provide students with the tools and opportunities they need to succeed. The Core Services in Community Schools are Expanded Learning Time (ELT), Attendance Supports, Family Engagement, and Health & Wellness. Part 1 – Community School Partnerships Goal(s) How is the CS strategy integrated into academic instruction at your school, and what impact has it had on student academic outcomes? The CS strategy is integrated into academic instruction at our school through our CBO after school program, which serves 200 students in grades K-5. Students work with counselors on homework and curriculum during after school. Additionally, the attendance support team encourages all students to be present, which promotes constant learning. The Community School strategy is integrated into academic instruction in forms of communication and collaboration between ELT staff, Mental Health Staff and Teacher. The school Social Worker has been working closely with the Guidance Team and has done push-ins in the classroom. This has allowed her to assist the teacher in addressing behavior issues that has led to less incidents in the classroom. In regards to attendance support, we have a team that meets weekly to discuss attendance and absenteeism trends. As part of the team, we have success mentors who work with students with 80%-90% attendance. We also have an Asthma Case Manager who works with the school and with students and families with asthma. Students with absences related to asthma are also referred to the Asthma Case Manager. Using restorative circles, we are also able to further align the community school strategy to instruction. During this time, children have an opportunity to share how they are feeling and teachers can take steps early in the day to respond as necessary to a student in need. Indicate the summative goal(s) of the Community School for the 2018-19 school year. Be sure to construct the goal to be SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Realistic, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 50% of our students will be reading at or above grade level as per Fountas and Pinnell Reading Assessment, and there will be a 25% decrease in the number of level 1s on the 2018-2019 NYS ELA exam as compared to the 2017-2018 exam, because of targeted instruction. By June 2019, the school's yearly attendance average will have increased by 2% totaling 93% for the school year in comparison to last year’s attendance average of 91% because of expanding student Success Mentoring. Our schools lateness average will decrease by 3% totaling 8% for the school year in comparison to last schools year’s lateness average of 11% because of extracurricular activities. By June 2019, 50% of our 5th grade students will have an Edge Coach that will guide students with further developing cognitive/social emotional executive functions. By June 2019, at least 50% of severely chronically absent/chronically absent students will have an identified success mentor in the school building. Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Community School Annual Goal(s): How will achieving your Community School Goal(s)--in Expanded Learning Time (ELT), Attendance Supports, Family Engagement, and Health & Wellness--support your academic goals for students? 9  Meeting our attendance goal of 93% will improve our testing data. With more students being present in school every day and on time, students will not miss out on learning opportunities. Through Edge Coaching, our 5th grade students will be able to develop the ability to plan, prioritize, focus and follow through. This will begin preparing students for the middle school transition. By identifying a success mentor we are seeking to enable students to come into school with the confidence and being able to have a voice. Part 2 – Community School Partnerships Core Services Action Plan Part 2a. Identify the Community-based Organization (CBO) partnerships that you will develop in ELT, Attendance Supports, Family Engagement, and Health & Wellness, their target student population(s), and scope of the services provided. As well as supporting schools’ supportive environment and attendance work, CBOs should be helping to support your school’s instructional focus. Scope of Service SY18-19 SMART Goal CBO Partnership ATT. Support ATT. Support Health and Wellness Target Population CA Students Students will be paired with a success mentor 450 students Universal approach 75 Students (Grade 5) Edge Coaching to 5th grade students, prioritizing students in temporary housing. Reduce CA percentage by 50% and have less than 5% of our students in the SCA category. Increase overall attendance to 93% and decrease lateness to 8%. By providing one-on-one coaching to 5th grade students, we are enabling a sense of independence for students transitioning to middle school. Part 3 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 3a. Indicate resources your Community Partnership will leverage to achieve your summative SMART goal(s) and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Based on the attendance changes we would like to implement we will need additional success mentors. This will commence October 2018-June 2019. The CBO team will work with admin in regards to schedule adjustments. AIDP funds will be used to support our goals and initiatives. Part 3b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) Title I SWP Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century C4E School Achievement X Other Funding 0  2. 3. 4. Part 3c. Describe how the school will partner with the Lead CBO to do the following: 1. Community Schools are expected to partner with a community-based partner organization (CBO) and together with members of the School Leadership Team, hire a Community School Director. The Director will lead implementation of the asset and needs assessment process, and other critically important coordinating activities. Indicate how you will leverage this aspect of the work. Community Schools are expected to personalize the needs of all students, through strategic programming and services, as determined by the asset and needs assessment, and must also offer Expanded Learning Time (ELT) and mental health programming. In completing this section, ensure that you think about how: (1) the right services are provided to the right students and families at the right time; and (2) how you will seamlessly coordinate services with instructional programming happening throughout and outside of the school day. Indicate how you will implement this work, and describe other programming you anticipate to be in place to strengthen this initiative. Community Schools are expected to emerge as Partnership Schools, which are places where parents and families feel welcome, actively participate in the conversation and decision-making around the renewal of their schools, and have many opportunities to advocate for their children. Monthly meetings and Community School Forums engaging families and community stakeholders will be a critical part of this family engagement strategy. Describe how you will implement this aspect of the work. Community School Principals are expected to meet on a weekly basis with their Community School Director, select Assistant Principals, key staff, and other CBOs, to analyze trends in data and case manage individual students. Data tools – including the New Visions Data Sorter - and training will be available for schools to use. Indicate how you will implement this aspect of the work. The school has partnered with BronxWorks and a CSD has been hired. The counseling team, the community school social worker, community school intern and the case manager meet on a weekly basis to ensure all students’ needs are being met and there aren’t duplication of services. We will continue with the following events: Teach Me Tuesday- this gives parents the opportunity to come to our school building and learn one skill that their child is currently learning about for one hour one Tuesday of each month. News with Orduz- This allows parents to have coffee hour with our principal. They do a school walk through, ask questions about testing and receive updates about our school. Learning Fairs- The fairs provide parents with insight as to what their child has learned and what is to come. Teachers also answer parent questions and provide tools for parents to support their child learning at home. CS Forum- The forum provides the school with the tools needed to implement ideas for the following school year (enrichment clubs, parent accountability) Movie Nights or family nights- Allow our families to mingle and build a sense of community while partnering with PBIS and the BronxWorks After-school Program. Part 4 – Community School Partnerships Oversight Part 4a. Key Staff and Partners 1. Name and describe the scope of involvement of all community partners working in the school (include partners supporting ELT, counseling, enrichment, etc.) 2. Name the members of your Community School Team and how meetings will be organized and structured to engage all stakeholders and be focused on results. 3. Explain data strategies including the use of the data sorter, and steps that the school will take to ensure that the appropriate interventions are provided to the right students 1  1a. Attendance- Led by the CSD and Principal. The team consists of the Community School (CS) Case Manager, CS Social worker, 6 School Aides (Success Mentors), Attendance Teacher, Asthma Case Manager and the Pupil Accounting Secretary. 1b. Edge Mentoring- Identifying all classroom staff members to become mentors in order to provide 5th grade students with the necessary executive functioning skills for middle school. 1c. The school counseling team consists of the school guidance counselor, CS case manager, CSD, and CS social worker. 2. The members in our CST are Mr. Muir (SLT Chair-4th grade teacher), Ms. Twiggs (UFT Rep), Ms. Solis (parent coordinator), Ms. Orduz (principal), Ms. Williams (PTA president), Ms. Doherty (SLT secretary), Ms. Thomas (para-professional), and Ms. Gardner (ELA AIS). These members represent different stakeholders in our school community. We have parents, teachers and administration present to ensure all needs and plans will benefit students, staff and families. An agenda is created for all meetings, and minutes from the previous meetings are reviewed. This ensures that items previously discussed had a follow through. 3. The data sorter is used during meetings to provide stakeholders with an update as to what efforts are being taken to increase attendance and how to have continuous improvement. The CSD provides data to the attendance team using the data sorter. It is used to monitor student progress and serves to put interventions in place. Data from the school wide incident report is also used and presented when appropriate, along with testing data. Part 4b. Indicate resources needed including human resources, instructional resources, and schedule adjustments to implement the Community School program. Based on the attendance changes we would like to implement we will need additional success mentors. This will commence October 2018-June 2019. Part 4c. Timeline for implementation and completion, including start and end dates. The mentoring program will begin in mid-September and continue through June 2019. Part 4d. Mental Health Work Plan Separate from this S/CEP, schools will complete a Mental Health Work Plan that will become an addendum to this document. 2  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 3  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: At PS 42 we offer a free standing ENL program. We currently have 44 ELL students. In order to supplement the core instruction program, we will provide two additional programs to meet the language development needs for Entering, Emerging, Transitioning, and Expanding ELL students in grades Kindergarten through fifth Grade. We will target language development in our kindergarten through firth grade, Entering and Emerging ELLs as well as additional preparation for the 2019 NYSESLAT. Transitioning and Expanding ELL students in Kindergarten through fifth grade will focus on targeted skill development in the writing domain, as well as additional preparation for the 2019 NYSESLAT . The rational that supports the need for these instructional programs is supported by the 2017 and 2018 NYSESLAT, NYSITELL, and 2018 NYS ELA data. Out of 12 "expanding" students, only 9 moved to "commanding." Out of "transitioning" students, 2 remained at transitioning, and 8 moved to "expanding." In order to ensure new comers (those who have been receiving services for 0-3 years and are approaching English proficiency on the NYSESLAT) reach proficiency within three years; to ensure Long-Term ELLs (those who have been receiving services for four or more years); and all other ELL students score proficient or move at least one proficiency level on the 2019 NYSESLAT, we will offer two different programs to meet the students language development needs. Our goals for these programs include the following: first to ensure that students are able to review content objectives and language objectives.The second goal will focus on making sure that ELL students are aware and exposed to test format and have a bank of test-taking strategies. Another goal is to ensure that Expanding students gain proficiency and that Entering, Emerging, and Transitioning level students gain at least one level of proficiency on the NYSESLAT. Students in grades three to five have an additional goal to move one performance level or more on the NYS ELA exam. A fourth goal for both of these programs is to provide support through vocabulary and language development. We will offer an after school program for Transitioning and Expanding proficiency level ELL students that will focus on a domain skill that students need more support in. According to 2018 NYSESLAT data students will focus on building reading and writing skills in the first part of the program (November-January). This will be done by using VTS (Visual Thinking Strategies). VTS is a program that is designed to build key thinking skills that students will use across all four domains (listening, speaking, reading, and writing). Students will build oral and written language literacy, visual literacy, and have collaborative interaction amongst peers while being exposed to a series of art work. Students use a series of three question prompts to write about what they see in the image. During the second part of the program students will focus on NYSESLAT test preparation (January-March). Students will be exposed to what the exam and task questions will look like for their test band and the skills needed to master them. In order to do this test prep books will be purchased. ELLs invited to attend this program are in grades Kindergarten to fifth and have reached a proficiency level of Expanding or Transitioning on the 4  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information NYSITELL or 2018 NYSESLAT. This program will run for a total of 20 weeks on Wednesdays and Thursdays after school, for an hour and a half (2:30pm-4:00pm). It will begin November 7, 2018 and end April 17, 2019 with aproximately 40 sessions. Instruction will be provided in English. The provider will build skills with students in grades K-2. An additional teacher with an ESL license will be asked to service the other with students in grades 3-5. Two separate classrooms will be used, with a ratio of approximately 20:1. The Saturday Program will provide support for ELLs who are currently at Entering and Emerging proficiency levels in Kindergarten- fifth grades. They will receive support in developing language and vocabulary in the first portion of the program (November- January) using VTS and vocabulary development and language games. In the second half of the program (January-March) students will bridge over to NYSESLAT test prep and skill development. Students will be exposed to what the exam and task questions will look like for their test band and the skills needed to master them. In order to do this test prep books will be purchased. Overall, the Saturday Program will aim to address the development of oral language, listening, reading and writing skills, and test sophication strategies. The program will run from November 10, 2018 to April 13, 2019 and will last for a total of 19 weeks. A provider will build skills with students in grades K-2, and then switch and service students in grades 3-5. One classroom will be used, with a ratio of approximately 12:1. Instructors for both programs after school and Saturday programs are TESOL certified. A supervisor will be hired for the Saturday Academy. NYS Common Core Standards based test preparation books for the NYSESLAT will be purchased for students in grades Kindergarten to fifth grade for the Saturday Academy and after school. Materials to teach VTS are provided at no cost as well as vocabulary development and language games. Records for these programs will be kept in a Title III program binder. The program binder will include attendance records, student information and data, parent contact information, returned permission slips, and copies of all communication sent to parents in their preferred language. Students attendance will be taken at the beginning of every session and will be also be used to inform the kitchen of the number of snacks or meals (breakfast) required. Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: Staff development will occur during school hours. The rationale for the professional development is supported by the NYS ELA and NYSESLAT data. Teachers attending professional development sessions will review differentiation, new strategies, scaffolding for ELL success, and new research in language development in different aspects with in the four modalities (listening, speaking, reading, and writing). Teachers will create lesson plans with ENL strategies to scaffold the units and lessons in the delivery of instruction. Teachers will also be sent to professional development offered by the district that reflects strategies for teaching ELLs as they are offered throughout the school year. 5  Part C: Professional Development In addition, our instructional staff will be immersed in second language acquisition methods and strategies that will be used for instruction during the Saturday Academy. Three to four sessions will be held for the teachers who will be providing instruction. Sessions will be held after school from 2:30-3:30 on Tuesdays during professional development time. For this reason, we will use the expertise of our ENL teacher to do on-site professional development in the field of language learning and acquisition. Records for professional development will be kept and maintained in the ENL binder held by the coordinator/ liaison. It will be updated regularly and will contain agendas, handouts, and attendance sheets. The professional development calendar is currently being developed. Once it has been finalized a copy will be placed in the binder as well. The professional development calendar will be updated regularly as the cycles change. Professional development is at no cost to the title III program and will be done by turn keying information by classroom teachers and the ENL coordinator/ liaison who have attended outside sessions. These professional development sessions will positively impact the progress of English Language Learners at P.S. 42 by providing their classroom teachers with strategies to successfully engage students in rigorous content work across the subjects. Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: In order to educate parents and/ or guardians of ELLs on how to support their students language development and preparation for upcoming NYS exams, PS 42 will offer a variety of parent workshops. These workshops include and are not limited to test preparation and strategies to help students with language development and how to help students to develop English Language skills. Parents will also be provided with information and invited to workshops that are being held in the community by the NYC DOE. Parents are also invited to and included in additional engagement sessions that are periodically held by the parent coordinator. In November, a parent meeting will be held for parents of ELLs, whom have Spanish as their primary language. This meeting will focus on CCLS and how parents can aid in their child's success. It will be facilitated by Sara Martinez, from Fordham University's RBERN division. This meeting will be facilitated in Spanish, the native language of the parents who are being targeted, and held on a Tuesday during Parent Engagement time, approximately 2:30-3:30pm. Parent engagement sessions will also occur on Tuesdays from 2:30-3:30 pm. Teach me Tuesday will cycle, focusing on teaching parents a skill that will help them help their child succeed in the work they are doing in school at home. Parents will meet with their child's grade team in order to learn the skill. Bilingual Spanish members on on staff for parents who need language assistance. Translation assistance of parents who speak other languages will also be available upon request. 6  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Workshops will be held during Saturday Information Fairs and Tuesday afternoons for Parent Engagement. They will be conducted by a certified ENL pedagogue, as well as the parent coordinator who is bilingual. An additional translator will be provided to speak in the native language of the majority of ELLs as needed. There will be two workshops one before December and another in February. Workshops will be devoted to teaching parents and/or guardians modified instructional strategies that can be used at home, how to create schedules that support study habits and environments that are conducive to studying. Parents will be shown how they can incorporate short periods of quality study when family priorities and events arise. Information will also be provided in the parents native language to help ensure they are able to support students development at home. During these sessions, parents and/or guardians will be given opportunities to develop materials needed for home study. Therefore in order to implement these workshops, the following supplies will be needed: pencils, paper, notebooks, folders, and copy paper. Refreshments will be provided for parents who are attending workshops. Bilingual dictionaries will be purchased for the parents of ELLs who are recent arrivals to the United States. P.S. 42 will also be purchasing translation transmission audio devices to facilitate parent learning throughout the school year. Parents will be notified of these activities via letters and fliers, in English and the parents preferred language.. Phone calls will also be placed to remind them of these workshops. Calendars are distributed to parents monthly via Wednesday folders. Records for parent engagement will be kept and maintained in the ENL binder held by the coordinator/ liaison. It will be updated regularly and will contain letters, fliers, calendars, agendas, handouts, and attendance sheets from parent engagement events and communication with the parents. The parent engagement calendar is currently being developed for the school year. Once it has been finalized a copy will be placed in the binder as well. Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits)  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental. Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. 7  Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL 8  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 09 School Name Claremont Community School Borough Bronx School Number 042 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Lucia Orduz-Castillo Coach Vanessa Brissolese ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Angelique Hernandez Teacher/Subject Area Greer Gardner Teacher/Subject Area Yolande Twiggs Related-Service Provider Janelle Ortiz Superintendent Leticia Rosario Assistant Principal Andrea Velez Coach Tierra Donaldson School Counselor Monica Valencia Parent Eli Sosa Parent Coordinator Oneida Solis Field Support Center Staff Member Luis Quan Other (Name and Title) type here C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 1 1 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 446 9 Total number of ELLs 65 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 14.57%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 1 4 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 K 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 3 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 2 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 5 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 6 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 7 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 8 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 9 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? P.S. 42 uses Fountas & Pinell to assess the early literacy skills of our ELLs. This provides us with data relating to phonetic awareness, sight words, reading accuracy, reading fluency, listening and reading comprehension, and speaking and writing skills. This informs our instructional plan by enabling teachers to instruct students according to listening, speaking, reading, writing, and phonetic awareness skills. Baseline and End line assessments are also administered throughout the school year in coordination with the Teacher's College (ELA) and Math curriculum's. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? The structures in place to support the administration of formative and or curriculum-embedded assessments takes place with in the classroom during the school year. ELLs have the option to receive assessments in their native language for support and also receive other testing accommodations that they are entitled to. This includes bilingual glossaries, extended time, and 0  separate location. Classroom teachers administer F & P periodically in both formal and informal assessments through out the school year, approximately four formal and two informal assessments are administered through out the year. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? The success of our ENL program is evaluated based on running record growth, NYSITELL, NYC Performance tasks, iReady diagnostics, NYSESLAT, and NYS ELA and Math scores. ELL growth is measured periodically with baseline, end line, and bench mark exams with in content areas as well. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? In order to support and address interventions needed for students based on summative data that has been gathered P.S. 42 offers several programs to support the growth and development. We offer reading rescue, AIS, and reading recovery to support ELA development. To support math development in areas of need students receive small group instruction and support in Math AIS. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] P.S. 42 uses data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RTI) framework by using the baseline data. The data is used to guide instruction for ELL classroom teachers, as well as to provide guided help with NYS Common Core standards students are not proficient in. Students who fall two levels or more below receive AIS and Reading Recovery services. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. We have approximately 4-16 ELL students per grade. In 2016, zero students scored in the commanding range. In 2015, five students earned a score of commanding on the NYSESLAT. The majority of students who reached proficiency have been receiving services for 0-3 years. Other students have reached proficiency have been receiving services for 4-6 years. The majority of ELLs can be found in the first, second, fourth, and fifth grades, followed by kindergarten and third grade. Of the 65 ELLs, 11 arrived to the United States at the beginning of the 2016-2017 school year and speak no English. The majority of students who took the 2016 NYSESLAT or 2016- 2017 NYSITELL scored expanding or transitioning. Across the grades the majority of students are at an transitioning or expanding proficiency level. There are currently approximately seventeen students who scored at the entering level on the 2016 NYSESLAT or NYSITELL and ten who scored at the emerging level. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? The structures in place to disseminate these finding in order to make adjustments to the programs at P.S. 42 are data share meeting with the ELL classroom teachers. At this time teachers are made aware of the ELL's progress made on the NYSESLAT and/ or their scores on the NYSITELL. With in this meeting both the students strengths and weaknesses are discussed. Classroom teachers are provided with information to help better understand the meaning of the proficiency level and to help set goals with the students language ability in mind. NYS assessment (Math and ELA) data is also used to guide instruction and design small groups to target areas of weakness. In addition, teachers in grades 3-5 receive data reports based on the ELL periodic through out the year as students complete this assessment. This allows for teachers to adjust goals and monitor gains that ELLs in their class have made. Part IV: ELL Programming 1  Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. P.S. 42 services ELL students via a Freestanding ENL program with both integrated and stand alone. Students are grouped according to their grade levels and proficiency levels, with no more that two consecutive grades in a group. Our ENL program is an academic interdisciplinary Balanced Literacy program designed for all students to acquire English language proficiency within the four language modalities: listening, speaking, reading, and writing. Furthermore, ELL Students are evaluated with quantitative assessments as per the NYC Department of Education with content and language proficiency. Our ENL services will provide opportunities for ELLs to achieve the same educational goals and standards as the general education student population. P.S. 42 will be using both stand alone and integrated ENL for grades K-5 depending on the students given proficiency level. By using highly flexible grouping based on general education and assessment data (NYSESLAT, NYS Assessments, ELL Periodic Assessment, Running Records, curriculum baseline and end line assessments, and student work), including conference notes, students will receive instruction based on their language and academic needs. Instruction will include small group and whole group. ELLs receive instruction, including content area instruction in English using ENL methodologies. b. TBE program. If applicable. Not applicable c. DL program. If applicable. Not applicable 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? In order to ensure the mandated number of instructional minuets are provided, students are grouped by grade-level and by English language proficiency level with no more than two concescutive grades in a group for stand alone ENL. Entering and Emerging level students receive 360 minutes (eight 45 minute sessions a week) or 2 units of English as a New Language (ENL) instruction on a weekly basis in both integrated and stand-alone models. Transitioning and Emerging level students receive 180 minutes (four 45 minute sessions a week) or one unit of ENL instruction integrated ENL instruction on a weekly basis. Commanding level students receive 90 minuets (two 45 minute sessions a week) or .5 units of ENL integrated instruction. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. All content area instruction is delivered in English. Unit Objectives integrate academic language objectives and content objectives. Objectives are common core aligned. All objectives are differentiated for students language proficiency. Such academic language objectives include the study of language structures, Tier 2 academic vocabulary and Tier 3 content area vocabulary. The facilitation of discussions is centered on the academic language objectives and further supported by question stems based on Webb's Depth of Knowledge Educational Objectives. ENL methodologies and strategies used to deliver the lessons include, but are not limited to: academic and content area language charts, visual charts, visual charts, realia, Total Physical Response (TPR), and graphic organizers to support the learning of languare and content objectives; as well as including activities that incorporate our ELL's life experiences and diverse cultures. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? 2  Although we do not have transitional biningual or dual language programs, new entrants, who speak languages other than English and are entitled to services based on the NYSITELL. Native Spanish speaking students are administered the Spanish LAB to determine their level of literacy in the native language. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status All English Language Learners (ELLs) in the P.S. 42 ENL program, regardless of subgroup, will receive instruction based on language proficiency data from Fountas & Pinnell runing record assessments, P.S. 42 content area assessments, the NYSESLAT, and the ELL Periodic Assessment for grades 3-5. Together the ELLs' classroom teachers and the ENL service provider will analyze these assessments as well as conference notes and use them to create goals based on academic language needs. A. SIFE parents and their families will be introduced to the school community and the ELL program through an individual orientation meeting with the Parent Coordinator and the ENL Teacher. During this meeting, an explination of school and classroom procedures will be explained. Primarily, the expectations will be set for the students to complete class work and homework. Also, as outlined in the Title III Instructional Program for P.S. 42, families will be strongly encouraged to attend the Saturday Academy; and to have their child attend the Bronx Works after school program. Regarding instructional support, SIFE students will receive integrated and stand-alone services to meet their linguistic and academic goals. The services are provided in small groups of no more than 12 students. Lessons are differentiated for students with the use of ELL specific strategies, visuals, manipulatives, technology, and translations. B. The newcomers will be supported with an ENL model through out the instructional day and will receive both integrated and stand-alone services. The students focus will be to enhance their reading, writing, listening, and speaking skills through the use of graphic organizers, scaffolding, and vocabulary words. In addition the students will also be enhancing their reading skills with small group instruction as well as guided reading groups. The students will also be invited to attend a newcomer after school program in which they will continue to build both social and academic stills in English. Lessons are differentiated for students with the use of ELL specific strategies, visuals, manipulatives, technology, and translations. Additional support will be offered on Saturdays with test sophistication strategies and test sophistication materials. The ELL/ SWD/ Holdover students will be serviced with intervention services such as AIS, Reading Recovery, and SETSS. Each classroom has a library with different genres and different levels for students to utilize, including bilingual and Spanish books. The classroom teachers also have Science and Social Studies textbooks for all students to utilize during the day. Newcomers will receive one supplemental period each day of beginning level English instruction beginning at the time of each student's enrollment at P.S. 42. This course will provide a period of instruction around NYS ENL Standards 1, 4, and 5. This period of instruction will meet the students' foundational linguistic needs by supporting the development of Basic Interpersonal Communication Skills (BICS) to support communication with the classroom teacher, students and other school staff. The following periods of instruction will continue to incorporate NYS ENL Standards 1, 4, and 5; however instructional focus will incorporate NYS ENL Standards 2 and 3 in order to develop Cognative Academic Language Proficiency (CALP). Lastly, instructional support in the students' L1 will be provided as needed and as available. The instructional plan for ELLs who have received 0 years of service, regardless of whether or not they were born in the United States, and ELLs who have received 1-3 years of service will receive more instructional support with oral language development. This will be provided through Tier 1, 2, and 3 vocabulary instruction, choral repetition, scaffolded language prompts, whole class, small group and pair discussions. Cognitive development in the second language occurs during Pre-Production, the first stage of second language acquisition at the time when the child is developing oral language skills, which include both listening and speaking skills. This stage of second language acquisition sets the foundation on which ELLs develop the academic language required to build reading and writing skills in the second language. Using the NYS ENL Standards that 3  specifically address listening and speaking skills and the NYS Common Core Standards, as well as conference notes, goals will be set and taught by the ENL teacher during instruction. In addition, the classroom teacher and the ENL teacher will collaborate during planning periods, before/after school, and/or lunch time to further support oral language development for newcomers in their classroom. P.S. 42, families of all ELLs who have received 0-3 years of service will be strongly encouraged to attend the ELL Saturday Academy and or after school programs; and to have their child attend the Bronx Works afterschool program. C. If a student still needs ENL services after three years in the ENL program, his/her case will be examined and an extension of services will be determined. With the extension of services, the student will continue to stay in an ENL setting in order to be in an environment where they can excel academically, and to avoid inconsistency in program instruction. For ELLs who have been receiving services for 4 to 6 years, the ENL and the classroom teacher will review school and all ELL data to determine deficient areas in the modalities of listening, speaking, reading, and writing. The ENL teacher will ensure that all ELLs receive the instructional units allocated based on their levels of language fluency and academic proficiency. In addition, differentiating instruction by exposing students to more read alouds, listening centers, and oral conversations will ensure ELLs meet proficiency levels. Next, together the ELL instructors will set academic and language goals to be taught using the instructional resources from the RIGOR (Reading Instructional Goals for Older Readers) program to increase CALP through instruction of Tier II academic vocabulary and Tier III content area vocabulary. In addition, long-term ELLs will be offered an engaging curriculum , drawing on their backgrounds, and organizing collaborative activities to scaffold instruction. Also, in collaboration with the classroom teacher and the ENL teacher we will create learning communities in the classroom where the students build confidence in themselves as learners. Instructional materials to support language proficiency are leveled and used accordingly based on the proficiency levels of the students. We take into account the point of entry of every ELL to improve student achievement and to ensure that ELLs are provided with a high quality education that will enable them to meet academic standards. The academic language development of our ELL population is planned accordingly to the program in which they are enrolled. Students in each grade level will receive daily, differentiated, small group guided reading instruction, using materials at the student's instructional reading level. Lessons are differentiated for students with the use of ELL specific strategies, visuals, manipulatives, technology, and translations. Apart from the aforementioned additional instructional support, as outlined in the Title III Instructional Program for P.S. 42, families of all ELLs who have received 4-6 years of service will be strongly encouraged to attend the ELL Saturday Academy and after school programs; and to have their child attend the Bronx Works after school program. D. For ELLs who have been receiving services for six or more years, both Tier 1 and Tier II interventions as well as the ENL academic and language needs will be reviewed by the classroom and ENL teacher, and then by the School Assessment Team. Upon completion of this review process, the academic and language needs will be revised and corresponding objectives will be taught over a six week period in small groups with no more than three students, using the instructional resources from the RIGOR program. After this period, academic and language needs will be reviewed and new objectives will be assigned. E. Students who have reached commanding on the NYSESLAT will receive additional supports for two years. The ENL teacher will provide .5 units or 90 minuets of integrated services in a content area. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? Teachers of ELL-SWDs use provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development by using ICT models and integrated and stand-alone services by all providers (ENL and related services). Several times a week ELL-SWD may be pulled out for additional services to help meet academic and language needs. Teachers model strategies that align with students needs. Additional materials such as visuals, glossaries, realia, scaffolded charts, and graphic organizers are used as well. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? 4  Our curriculum embeds and incorporates UDL practices for the teachers to implement to assist the ELL-SWDs. Use of technology , such as SMART boards and lap tops allow visual, tactile and kinesthetic input to facilitate learning, all IEP services are provided with in the classroom settings to allow for scaffolding of the curriculum and meeting IEP driven goals within classroom instruction to assist the students with accessing the content. Flexible scheduling is provided to address individual program needs of the students. These strategies allow for students to have supports to allow for the LRE. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. All ELLs, regardless of subgroup, are receiving the mandated ENL, ELA, Math, and other content area allotted instructional time. For newcomers and long-term ELLs, instruction will include Tier II academic vocabulary and Tier III area vocabulary as well as content area concepts. In addition, for newcomers, lesson preparation will emphasize building background to prepare for vocabulary and concepts of Math, Science, and Social Studies units. Targeted intervention for content are instruction for ELLs with special needs and SIFE students will be followed as outlined above in corresponding sections. Our ELL Saturday Academy Program is used to provide academic intervention to our ELL population.English is the language in which intervention services are offered, however, with SIFE students, the native language might be used to strengthen students' native language proficiency and skills to ensure they are able to transfer these skills to the second language. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? ENL providers will focus on ELA content when providing integrated services in the classroom. More specifically writing will be the focused target. At the end of this school year 2016-2017, programming and scheduling will be reviewed by administration. During this time changes will be made to address the instructional needs of all ELL students. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? No ENL programs/ services will be discontinued for at least 2 years, providing students with extended services and testing accommodations, this is also pending that all current students become commanding and there are no new ELLs registered. Parent Survey and Selection forms will also indicate a need for a program change. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. All ELL students are invited to participate in any ENL after school and Saturday academy programs, Saturday Academy programs for NYS ELA and Math exams, after school programs including 5 th grade band, chorus, studio and art, science clubs, guided reading programs, extra curricular physical education events and programs (basketball, soccer, and track and field teams) and the Bronx Works after school program. ELL students in all grades who do not meet grade level reading bench marks will be invited to join reading intervention programs. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. The instructional materials used to support ELLs are: SMARTboards, conference notes, small group plans, Fountas & Pinnell running record assessment materials, GO! Math and Hartcourt Science and Social Studies textbooks, Balanced Literacy leveled libraries (by levels and genres), picture and bilingual dictionaries, vocabulary-picture cards, and picture books. In addition, students students will be provided with laptops/ computers to access the following websites to support development: McGraw Hill Acuity (Reading and Math), Starfall, Brain pop (and Brain Pop Jr.) 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? The P.S. 42 ENL Program offers native language support through bilingual teachers, staff, and language buddies. Bilingual Spanish-English teacher provide language support when students are unable to communicate in English in the classroom. Language buddies are also provided to students whose teachers who are not able to communicate in the students native language if applicable. Language buddies are students who share the same native language. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. 5  All required services support and resources correspond to ELLs' ages and grade levels. All ELLs have a different entry point. Therefore, ELLs will be exposed to a comprehensive core curriculum in literacy and mathematics to meet the challenges of English Language Learners. Support staff providing instruction to our ELL population receives ongoing professional development on research-based coaching and teaching strategies to support our ELL community. The ENL teacher in collaboration with our literacy coaches, math coach, and classroom teacher select instructional materials that are age and grade appropriate in order to promote proficiency level. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? The instructional materials used to support ELLs are: SMARTboards, conference notes, small group plans, Fountas & Pinnell running record assessment materials, GO! Math and Hartcourt Science and Social Studies textbooks, Balanced Literacy leveled libraries (by levels and generes), picture and bilingual dictionaries, vocabulary-picturecards, and picture books. In addition, students students will be provided with laptops/ computers to access the following websites to support development: McGraw Hill Acuity (Reading and Math), Starfall, Brain pop (and Brain Pop Jr.) 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). Parents and students meet with the ENL teacher and receive the following in the student's native languageif possible: tour of the school and student's classroom, and explanation of classroom rules and procedures, the homework policy, an after school program application, and contact numbers of the Parent Coordinator and ENL teacher. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? Not applicable. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? Not applicable. Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? Teachers will receive professional development in multiple ways to monitor student progress. One way is through individual meetings after administering the ELL periodic assessment, and running records. The classroom teacher and the ENL provider will share student progress by analyzing class work and assessment data. The meetings will be between the classroom teacher and the ENL teacher to discuss student progress towards academic academic and language goals by analyzing class work and assessment data, additionally, ongoing Professional Development which includes instructional support and technical assistance on the latest ELL policies and trends will be facilitated by our network ELL Support Staff. ENL teachers will attend network and city wide workshops, other teachers are encouraged to attend. Our workshops will focus on the implementation of ENL methodology throughout all content areas and the differentiation of instruction to meet the needs of our ELLs. ENL providers will turn key and or provide Professional Development to help aid all classroom teachers and instructional staff in ELL development. Professional Development will include but not be limited to strategies to help ELLs, understanding ELL data, and using the data to set obtainable goals. A copy of the calendar of professional development will be placed in the ENL binder when it becomes available. The professional development calendar consists of multiple in house PDs that are content based 6  (Teachers College reading and writing, GO Math, and strategies for ELL development. At P.S. 42 many different professional development resources are offered to teachers of ELLs in order to help support ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards. We also hold grade level meeting that discuss strategies used to aid ELLs and scaffold/ differentiate instruction and have common planning time. Teachers of ELLs and other classroom teachers attend professional development offered by OELL and other organizations. To support the content teachers are send to off site professional development sessions for both ELA (Teachers College) and Math (Go Math). Members of the go math and TC support teams also provide in house professional development with models as well. Classroom teachers are also implementing Visual Teaching Strategies (VTS) and will continued to be trained through out the year. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. The school leadership, guidance counselor, and parent coordinator work together to create a well-designed transition plan to restore the sense of belonging once our ELLs leave our school. We have transition activities including open house visits to the new middle school. The guidance counselor and/ or parent coordinator will coordinator will coordinate theses visits and accompany parents and their children when needed. Also, we have information sharing between middle school administrators and counselors and elementary staff to help facilitate with the transition initiatives. In addition, our guidance counselor conducts individual and group meetings with ELLs to address the sensitivities and anxieties accompanying a move to a new school. The guidance counselor also ensures that parents attend middle school fairs. The school leadership encourages parents to work with us a partners in this effort to support our ELL population to help them recognize that becoming comfortable in a new school setting is an ongoing process. We make sure we build their self-esteem and encourage them to continue succeeding in this educational path. In addition to individual meetings, teachers will meet during NYC Professional Development (PD) days. The professional development workshops will insure that we are providing the required 7.5 hours of training for all staff. The PD workshops will teach subject matter that will develop teachers' understanding and knowledge of second language acquisition- on how to scaffold academic language objectives in order for ELLs to develop oral language skills that support literacy skills in reading and writing- ENL instructional strategies, and how to collect and analyze student data and use it to differentiate instruction. Therefore, teachers from grades K-5 will also use this time to collaboratively examine student work, conference notes, assessments, and share ENL teaching strategies that have worked for their students or need improvement. Teachers will also have the opportunity to observe the ENL teacher conducting demonstration lessons and discuss best ENL practices, techniques, and strategies. The ENL teacher will maintain sign-in sheets, agendas, and handouts to support teacher participation. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? P.S. 42 provides several annual individual meeting with parents of ELLs. These opportunities serve as a way to discuss goals of the ENL program, language development, language assessment results, and language development needs across all content areas (math, ELA, science, social studies), as well as a means to discuss social growth and development and concerns that the parent or providers have about the child. At all meeting copies of information are translated into the parents preferred language as indicated on the home language survey. Translation and interpretation services are also offered from bilingual staff members including classroom teachers, ENL providers, parent coordinator, support staff and classroom aids. In the event that the parent/ guardian does not speak a language that staff members speak an interpreter will be brought into P.S.42. The annual meetings that P.S. 42 holds for parents of ELLs are; parent orientation upon ELL identification, scheduled parent-teacher conferences, parent information sessions conducted by the parent coordinator, back to school night, and conferences with the ENL providers. Additional conferences and meeting will be scheduled as needed. 7  2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Research confirms that when parents participate in their child's school experience, a child is more likely to succeed. Levels of English language proficiency should not be a barrir for active parent involvement. We are committed to provide every child with the chance to excel academically and to become fluent in English and we are fully aware that parents are key players in order to make this happen for our children. Together with our Parent Coordinator, Bronx Works (partnered community our reach program), and our PTA executive members we continually strive to improve the communication with our LEP families. At our orientation session with all parents and our annual "Open House" (early September- within 10 days of student enrollment), we provide parents of new ELLs with guidance on how to make the right decision about a program as well as the "exit rate" from the ELL programs. Our sessions also inform our parents on state common core learning standards, assessments, school expectations, and promotion policy. Our parent coordinator and PTA president withh assist with the translation services in Spanish. The HLIS will be used to determine if there is the need to contract an interpretor who speaks a language other than English if necessary. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Paste response here: 8 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Lucia Orduz-castillo, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 9  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: P.S. 42 Claremont Community Sc School DBN: 09x042 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Lucia Orduz-Castillo Title Principal Andrea Velez Assistant Principal Oneida Solis Parent Coordinator Angelique Hernandez ENL/Bilingual Teacher Eli Sosa Parent Yolande Twiggs Teacher/Subject Area Greer Gardner Teacher/Subject Area Vanessa Brissolese Tierra Donaldson Coach Coach Monica Valencia School Counselor Leticia Rosario Luis Quan Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member ------------------------- Janelle Ortiz Other Related Services -------------------- Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 06/30/17 06/30/17 06/30/17 06/30/17 06/30/17 06/30/17 06/30/17 06/30/17 06/30/17 06/30/17 06/30/17 06/30/17 06/30/17 1/1/01 1/1/01 0 2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools School Name: P.S. 42 Claremont Community School Superintendent: Leticia Rosario DBN: 09x042 The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Oneida Solis Parent Coordinator Yes Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. According to the Home Language Identification Survey, 75% of the 60 ELLs speak Spanish at home. Within the first 30 days of student enrollment, P.S. 42 determines the primary language spoken by the parent of each student. If the language is not English, the school will determine whether the parent requires language assistance in order to communicate effectively with the school. The school maintains a current record of the primary language of each parent and stores information in ATS and on the student emergency cards. The UPPS, UPCO, and RAPL are retrieved from ATS to determine the parent's preferred language. In addition to the Home Language Identification Survey, all parents at P.S. 42 receive a survey in November at Parent Teacher Conferences in which they are asked questions regarding preferences like preferred days and 1  times for workshops, and language needs. This information is then collected electronically and revisited in making decisions for the remainder of the school year. To ensure that all parents are included in the school community, all school-home communication is made in English and Spanish. Should a parent prefer translation in another language, accommodations are made to provide interpretation either in the written or oral form. Written communication includes but are not limited to student specific documents, school events, memos, translated homework instructions, messages from the principal, and communications from the New York City Department of Education. Centrally and regionally produced critical communication includes: registration forms, student performance information such as report cards, conduct and safety information, special education information, transfer and discharge forms. Student specific critical documents include student specific information regarding health, safety, legal, or disciplinary matters, entitlement to public education or placement in Special Education, ENL, or non-standard program, progress reports, and permission slips/ consent forms. The staff at P.S. 42 are also reflective of the needs of the community. P.S. 42 has a bilingual principal, a bilingual assistant principal, a bilingual parent coordinator, a bilingual guidance counselor, and a number of bilingual teachers and support staff to assist in oral and written translation. P.S. 42 has also partnered with Community Based Organization Bronxworks , who has bilingual staff members in school to assist with parents needs. In order to ensure that parents language and interpretation needs are met a language report is created and updated regularly for parents per grade and class. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Parent Preferred Languages English- 281- 70% 281 Spanish- 129 -25.4% 108 Arabic-6- 1.5% Soninke- 5- 1.2% Fulani- 1- .25% 6 4 1 70 26.8 1.49 .99 .25 279 109 6 5 1 69 27.05 1.49 1.24 .25 2  .5 .25 2 1 .5 .25 2 1 French-2- .5% Fanti- 1- .25% P.S. 42 is committed to providing parents with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child's education. One of the school goals is to partner with The top three languages in P.S. 42 are Spanish, followed by a variety of African dialects, and Arabic. In order to address written translation for these languages P.S. 42 uses a translator when needed if a staff member who is fluent in that language is not available. All written communications are sent home in both English and the preferred language. To address oral language needs a translator is used when required to communicate with parents who do not speak a language that is fluent with other staff members. P.S.42 uses the translation services provided by the D.O.E including but not limited to an over the phone translation and in-house translation services. NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. 3  None Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. Per session funding is set aside for a staff member to translate monthly newsletters. All other information is translated by office staff. Should translation be needed for a document that we are unable to translate in-house, use of translation funding will be made to purchase outside translation services. Monthly Quarterly Bi-Yearly As needed Monthly school calendars, grade level newsletters, parent-teacher conference announcements, after school program information, NYS testing memos to inform parents of the dates for exams (NYSESLAT, NYS ELA, NYS MATH, NYS SCIENCE), school events (family nights, dances, movie nights, earth day, end of year carnival, seasonal festivals), back to school night, supply lists, notices from school nurse, ENL documents (entitlement, non-entitlement, continued services, parent survey and program selection, discontinued services) Notices are periodically sent throughout the school year in a timely manner to ensure that parents and guardians have prior notice for when the events will be occurring. NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to Parent open house night (September), parent-teacher conferences (periodically through out the year), News with Orduz (monthly coffee hour Monthly Quarterly provide interpretation service(s)? Per session funding is set aside to provide oral translation for parents at workshops, conferences taking place after-hours. Translation devices have 4 Bi-Yearly As needed with principal), Teach Me Tuesday (monthly parent workshop, attendance team communication (when a student is absent frequently), guidance counselor calls (as needed to discuss concerns), informal meetings at dismissal, IEP meetings. Prior to formal face-to-face meetings and events, an interpreter will be secured either through staffing in the school or the purchase of interpretation through a vendor. Translation devices purchased by the school allows for mass transmission of the translation (pending number of audible devices). been purchased to provide mass translation at one time to a number of parents at such events. Should the school staff be unable to translate orally for a specific language, the school will contact DOE to secure translation. NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. School Messenger provides translation as per ATS. As does, Kinvolved, a texting application the school has purchased in order to communicate with parents. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Parent Coordinator, who also serves as the Language Access Coordinator, will receive training as provided by the New York City Department of Education. The training will be turn-keyed to respective staff upon starting the new school year. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) 5  As per Section VII of Chancellor's Regulation A-663 P.S.42 will fulfill parental notification requirements for translation and interpretation services by posting welcome signs and notices in both English and Spanish (the most prominent language). Parents will br provided with translated copies of the Parents' Bill of Rights and the Parents' Guide to Language Access. Parents will be informed in both written and oral communications on how to access translation services that are not currently available in the school. Language ID Guides will be provided at the security desk and in the main office. P.S. 42 is responsible for providing each parent whose language is not English with written notification of their translation and interpretation services rights. These notifications will be made in appropriate languages. Parent communication in an appropriate language is also part of P.S. 42's school safety plan. Procedures will be established so that the parents in need of language may communicate with school administrative offices without language barriers. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? P.S. 42 will use periodic parent surveys to gather feedback from parents on the quality and availability of translation and interpretation services. Parents and guardians will also have meetings with the PTA and Bronx Works in order to further gather information about needs and quality of services that are offered. 6 
