 12X044 School Name: P.S. 044 DAVID C. FARRAGUT Principal: MELISSA HARROW 2018-19 CEP-CS 1  Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC)   School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information CS44 321200010044 School Number (DBN): 12X044 Pre-Kindergarten , Kindergarten, First Grade, Second Grade, Third Grade, Fourth Grade, Fifth Grade 1285 Prospect Avenue Bronx New York 10457 718-583-2360 Phone Number: 718-901-4068 Fax: Melissa Harrow mharrow2@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Email Address: Melissa Harrow Sandra Leiser Zeudi Somerset Asia Boyd NA NA NA Lynn Saunders District Information Geographical District: 12 Superintendent’s Office Address: Jacqueline Rosado Superintendent: 1970 West Farms Road Bronx New York 10460 jrosado3@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718-328-2310 Phone Number: 718-542-7736 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC)   FSC: Bronx Jose Ruiz Executive Director: 1230 Zerega Avenue, Bronx, NY 10462/One Fordham Plaza, Bronx, NY 10458 Executive Director’s Office Address: Jruiz2@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: (718) 828 - 7776 Phone Number: Fax: (718) 741 - 8895 (718) 828-6280   Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Melissa Harrow Sandra Leiser ZeudiSomerest NA NA NA NA NA LisbethGarcia Angela Viverito *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/Parent (PTACo-President) Member/Parent   NA NA NA NA Asia Boyd Marie Coyle Stephanie Parker NA NA NA Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Member/Parent Member/Parent NA Member//UFT Member/UFT/SLT Chairperson Member/UFT Member/UFT Member/UFT NA NA   Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with   the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement   Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Our fundamental strategy is to create processes for building culture, learning together, and simplifying daily operations. By consistently using and refining our processes in these three key areas, we optimize the school experience.   2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. We are becoming an exemplary school in the nation’s largest public school system (NYCDOE) and part of a district (CSD 12) that is committed to being anchored for greatness and going the extra degree. At CS44, we create the conditions that enable every member of the community to become courageous competitors who proactively influence our world. Our fundamental strategy is to create processes for building culture, learning together, and simplifying daily operations. By consistently using and refining our processes in these three key areas, we optimize the school experience. Our guiding documents are the Strategic Objective and the collection of working procedures including governing documents such as the NYCDOE Chancellor’s Regulations, Charlotte Danielson’s Framework for Teaching and the CS44 Staff Handbook. CS44 is a school located within the poorest Congressional District in the nation. While CS44 has been a positive cornerstone in the community for over 1+00 years, there is much work to be done in order to realize our vision. We are here to ensure that our students can compete in the global marketplace and proactively influence the world as a generation of compassionate leaders who are self-aware and independent while also realizing that power and influence comes through positive relationships and connections with others. The core of our practice is learner-centered. We give everyone the opportunity to actively engage with content and make their own meaning about the world around them. We work collaboratively with others to grow ideas, knowledge, skills, and expand our thinking. Teachers College Reading and Writing Project builds literacy competencies. The EngageNY and Exemplars curriculums help grow mathematical thinking and reasoning skills. We believe that expectations must be clear at all times and a positive learning environment must be cultivated within our building. To that end, our schoolwide ROAR initiative creates consistency within and across classrooms by helping students understand behavioral expectations and providing incentives for making choices that support learning. We believe that the quality of adult learning defines the quality of student learning. To that end, professional development is a cornerstone of our work. We look to staff to identify opportunities for themselves based on their own learning plans and we also hold the expectation that staff members continuously develop in the areas defined by the core of our practice and individual feedback on their performance. Through intense commitment to the growth and development of team members, who are self-aware, critically reflective, wise, and driven learners, we cultivate a dynamic learning environment free of bias. We communicate with fairness, honesty, and use low-inference information that enables us to separate personal feelings from professional feedback knowing that everything is being done in the service of increasing outcomes for all. Our work is not complicated, it is complex. It covers the intersections of the social, political, physical, emotional and technological factors influencing the lives of everyone connected to us. Our effectiveness depends on our ability to foresee, and strategically plan for, the adaptive challenges ahead of time, and recognize and appropriately respond to the technical challenges in real time. Although our systems are defined and set, they are adaptive to allow us to learn in the midst of complexity. We will use defined systems for responding to internal and external demands that preserve focus on our learning and the stability of our culture and relationships. Our time and energy will be dedicated to the important work of increasing student achievement by improving our practices, strengthening our community, and finding enjoyment in the challenging work of shaping courageous competitors who proactively influence our world. Our school is more than the building we occupy but our facility defines our connection to one another, and provides us with the space for our collective growth and development. We will preserve and protect the investment made 0  (equipment, books, technology, etc) to ensure a climate supportive of learning. Our care for the physical environment mirrors the care for one another and also is a visual representation of our values and beliefs as a community. Our vision is a piece of paper but becomes a tangible reality when every member of the community engages in self leadership and invests in our shared mission. We are in control of the most powerful tools we need to realize the vision: our mindset, willingness to work hard, willingness to grow even in discomfort, and our relationships with one another. At the end of the day, we control our outcomes and make decisions about our success as a community. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. CS44 is an elementary school serving approximately 277 scholars in grades Pre-K-5. 92% of our scholars are eligible for free and reduced lunch. 20% of our scholars are English Language Learners and 19% of our scholars are Students with Disabilities. Over 40% of our population is comprised of Students in Temporary Housing (STH). 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. During SY2017-18, we saw the following results on NY ELA and Math Tests: Level 1 Level 2 Level 3 Level 4 Level 3+4 ELA 34.3% 35.4% 24.2% 6.1% 30.3% Math 40.4% 26.9% 22.1% 10.6% 32.7% Based on this work, we have seen the following changes in our scores from SY17-18 to SY16-17: Level 1 % change Level 2 % change Level 3 % change Level 4 % change Level 3 +4 % change ELA -13.8% Math -5.0% +7.5% -4.6% +1.1% +3.6% +5.1% +6.0% +6.3% +9.6% Our data demonstrates that we are working to reduce the number of Level 1s and increase proficiency levels. Our Advance Measures of Teacher Practice Scores (MOTP) suggest that we need support in the Instructional Core. Domain 3 Overall 2.24 3B: Questioning and Discussion Techniques 2.28 3C: Engaging Students in Learning 3D: Using Assessment in Instruction 2.18 2.27 Within the Framework for Great Schools, we have been focusing our efforts on Rigorous Instruction, Collaborative Teachers, and Supportive Environment. 1  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 12X044 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration PK,0K,01,02,03,04,05 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 275 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 4 4 12 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 25 23 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 96.0% % Attendance Rate 95.3% % Reduced Lunch 16.7% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.4% 58.5% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 0.7% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 6.91 0% 52% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 30.3% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 47% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A NO N/A N/A NO Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A NO N/A N/A YSH Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 44 44 88.8% 0.7% 20.0% 40.0% 0.0% 0.7% 2 4% 10 32.7% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No YES N/A N/A N/A NO YES N/A N/A N/A YSH N/A N/A N/A N/A NO N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Our 2016-17 Quality Review rating for 1.1 Curriculum was Developing. It was noted that curricula and academic tasks reflect planning to provide for student access and for alignment to the Common Core Learning Standards. However, curricula and tasks inconsistently emphasize rigorous habits and higher-order skills across grades and subjects. Our Advance Teacher Performance data for SY17-18 also suggests that we have work to do in Danielson Domain 3 - our average Teacher Scores from Classroom Observations for Measures of Teacher Practice where as follows: Domain 3 Overall 2.24 3B: Questioning and Discussion Techniques 2.28 3C: Engaging Students in Learning 3D: Using Assessment in Instruction 2.18 2.27 Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, all students will be given access to learning opportunities that allow them to articulate what they are learning, how they are learning it, and show evidence toward their progress as measured by a 5% overall increase in student proficiency on the New York State ELA and Math Exams. 3  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Teachers will design and modify Units of Study and lessons based on data and standards to ensure that all students are provided with an opportunity to achieve. This work will happen in Grade Team Meetings and be tracked on Google Drive. All teachers September 2018- June 2019 Administration, Teacher Leaders, Teachers Using Unit Plans, teachers will craft instructional objectives that are accessible to students and allow them to measure student progress toward the objective. Teachers will consistently design a range of pedagogical approaches/strategies to address the needs of all students when implementing Units of Study and planning daily lessons to access high levels of student thinking and performance. When planning lessons, teachers will provide students with access to clear criteria and offer exemplar work samples that model grade level performance. Teachers will follow a consistent schedule in the classroom that ensures that all students receive individualized feedback at least once every two weeks through small group or individual conferences in Reading, Writing and Math. Administration and Teacher Leaders (Model Teachers, Peer Collaborative Teachers) will conduct walkthroughs and provide feedback regarding strengths, challenges, and next steps to individual teachers, groups of teachers, and the entire school community. All Teachers September 2018 - June 2019 Administration Teachers Teacher Leaders All teachers September 2018-June 2019 Administration Achievement coaches Model Teacher Peer Collaborative Teacher Administration Administration will monitor student progress using Google Drive Grade Books, IReady, ELA/Math Trackers to monitor student progress and ensure that instructional practices are aligned to student needs. SBO half days and data meetings with Administration will be used on a quarterly basis to analyze data and determine instructional next steps. All teachers Administration September 2018-June 2019 Students 4 Administration September 2018- June 2019 Administration Teachers September 2018-June 2019 Administration, Achievement Coaches Model Teachers, Peer Collaborative Teachers, Universal Literacy Coach Administration will engage in frequent cycles of observation using the Advance system. Timely feedback will be provided to teachers with concrete next steps and specially designed professional development. During these visits, Administration will monitor student progress toward instructional outcomes and personal goals by asking students what they are learning, how they are learning it, and asking for evidence toward their progress. Teachers will receive professional development support to continue to grow their content and pedagogical knowledge. This support will come from partnerships with Teachers College Reading and Writing Project (ELA), Metamorphasis (Math), Universal Literacy Coach, Achievement Coach, New Teacher Project (Mentoring). Teachers will strategically collaborate with their colleagues to share best practices, solve problems of practice, and ensure that instruction is aligned to student needs through participation in differentiated professional learning opportunities. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. We will have workshops throughout the year to help our families understand the expectations for classroom instruction. The workshop will also include information about ways that families can help their children at home. These workshops will be led by our Parent Coordinator, Teacher Leaders, Outside Organizations, and CS44 Staff. We will have school-wide literacy and math nights. Teachers have also planned four events for families during the year on Family Engagement Tuesdays to support families to understand the academic expectations in the classroom. We have also asked families to consistently ask their child what they are learning, how they are learning it, and what they need to do to advance to the next level. This information was shared at Open School Night and will continue to be shared in communication throughout the year. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Title I SWP/Tax Levy Funding for One School-Based Achievement Coach and NTC Mentor Title I SWP/Tax Levy Funding for partnerships with TCRWP and Metamorphosis 5  FSF and SWP was used to to fund or model teacher and peer teacher mentor. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, in order to improve student engagement as defined by Danielson Domain 3, all teachers will focus on making lesson-specific data-based modifications to their lesson design and lesson implementation resulting in 0.10 increase for 50% of our teachers in Domain 3C as measured through Teacher Evaluation Cycles. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) New York State Tests Fountas and Pinnell Running Records End of Unit Assessments ELA/Math Trackers Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 6  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? CS44 has been working with the Positive Behavioral Intervention Support framework for seven years. We have worked to develop a more inclusive and positive school culture by establishing school-wide expectations. We are finding that these expectations are meeting the needs of the majority of our scholars. In our 2018 School Quality Guide, our score for Supportive environment decreased from 2.04 to 1.20. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, CS44 will implement a Restorative Justice pilot along with our existing PBIS program as a tool to provide learning experiences that provide a safe and healthy school environment resulting in a 10% decrease in Level 3-5 OORS incidents. 7  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) PBIS team will review and revise the current PBIS program based on feedback and reflections from SY17-18. PBIS program will be designed to develop a common understanding of how we will create a school community that is safe and conducive to learning while fostering a sense of ownership for providing social and emotional supports. All Staff Students Parents July - August 2018 PBIS Team Administration PBIS team will plan at least one event per month to promote home-school partnerships through workshops and celebrations that foster community building. All staff Parents September 2018- June 2019 Administration PBIS Team Students These celebrations will include celebrations for scholars who have exemplified our schoolwide values of Respect, Ownership, Achievement, and Responsibility (ROAR). PBIS Team will train staff on the implementation of Class DoJo and Incident Reports. We will use this combination of data to track student behaviors and plan for celebrations and supports. PBIS Team will monitor and analyze data from the system bi-weekly at team meetings and identify action steps to support identified needs. PBIS Team will follow up on next steps identified to measure progress. PBIS team will plan a monthly celebration for all students who have earned DoJo points. Class DoJo will also be used to communicate information about classroom activities and events. Class DoJo is available in both Spanish and English which will enable our all families access to information. All Teachers September 2018-June 2019 Administration PBIS Team All Teachers The PBIS team along with the IEP Coordinator/Special Education team will develop specific strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities in accordance with their IEPs/BIPs. The team will meet with teachers and make any modifications to behavior plans as needed. PBIS Team Special Education Teachers September 2018-June 2019 PBIS Team All Teachers 8  A Restorative Justice team will be formed with 3-7 team members that will motivate, manage and implement school-wide Restorative Justice practices. CS44 Staff September 2018 Administration All members of the Restorative Justice team will receive 5 day training facilitated by Morningside Center. Restorative Justice Team will assess school needs by looking at data from Incident Reports, Class DoJo, Suspensions, Learning Environment Survey, etc.. Team will then make recommendations/action plan for how to implement the program school-wide. Restorative Justice Team September 2018-June 2019 Restorative Justice Team PBIS team and the Restorative Justice Committee will develop and deliver structured lessons based on each month's core value to each class. Lessons will focus on and improve students' social-emotional intelligence. This will subsequently will increase positive behavior and decrease crisis incidents. Administration will work with Restorative Justice Team and PBIS Team to evaluate the implementation of both programs at bi-monthly meetings. PBIS Team Restorative Justice Team September 2018- June 2019 PBIS Team Restorative Jusice Team 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Teachers will log points awarded to students through Class DoJo. We will encourage all families to register for Class DoJo so they can monitor how their scholars are doing in "real time." We will message the use of Class DoJo to families as a way to have ongoing communication with classroom teachers and the school about student learning. We will host events to encourage families to register on Class DoJo and send out regular updates to families about news from their classroom through the use of DoJo. The PBIS Team and Administration will monitor Class DoJo to ensure participation by the entire school. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment 9  Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. PBIS Team and Restorative Justice team meetings will be funded with Title 1 SWP and Tax Levy funding for per-session PBIS Team events will be funded with Title 1 SWP and Tax Levy funding Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, CS44 will incorporate electronic incident reports and Class Dojo to support our existing PBIS program in monitoring and assessing behavior that impact learning, as represented by at least a 10% decrease in Level 3-5 OORS incidents and infractions and an increase of 20% in the number of Dojo points earned by each scholar from 2017-2018. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Electronic incident reports, teacher observations, student feedback, Dojo points gained, OORS report data analysis. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 0  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Our 2016-17 Quality Review rated our Teacher Teams and Leadership Development as "Proficient." Our NYC School Quality Guide rated Collaborative Teachers as 2.41. We would like to leverage this strength to support with our need for support in Curriculum (1.1) and Pedagogy (1.2) which were both rated as "Developing" on our Quality Review. This is consistent with our Advance data that suggests that Domain 3 on the Danielson Framework which focuses on Instruction is an area in need of improvement. During SY17-18, our average Teacher Scores from Classroom Observations for Measures of Teacher Practice where as follows: Domain 3 Overall 2.24 3B: Questioning and Discussion Techniques 2.28 3C: Engaging Students in Learning 3D: Using Assessment in Instruction 2.18 2.27 Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, all teachers in collaboration with administration, will meet in Grade Teams weekly to modify annual, unit and daily lesson plans to ensure that instructional plans address all students goals and needs as measured by a minimum of 5% increase achievement on End of Unit assessments in ELA and Math for all students. 1  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Teacher teams will use Google Drive to collect student data. Our data specialist will create grade books for every class and teachers will track performance on both benchmark and end of unit exams as well as Fountas and Pinnell Scores. Students September 2018-June 2019 Data Specialist In Grades 3-5, we will also use IReady, PerformanceSeries, and ELA/Math Trackers to collect achievement data. We have a yearlong assessment calendar in Google that captures all of the administration dates. Teachers and Administration developed a menu of possible focus ideas for weekly grade team meetings during Monday PD, SBO Friday "Lunch" Meetings, and their Professional Period. This list includes: Unit Plans/Pacing, Differentiation, Lesson Planning, Feedback, Looking at Student Work, Data Action Planning, Unpacking Units of Study, Goal Setting, Grade Based PD, Peer Feedback on Instructional Practices, Goal Setting, etc. Teachers Administration September 2018-June 2019 Achievement Coaches Administration will provide consistent time in the schedule for teachers to meet collaboratively to plan for instruction. Teachers September 2018-June 2019 Teachers will meet in both vertical grade band teams (K-2/3-5) on a bi-weekly basis to develop school-wide consistency, strengthen content knowledge, and examine evidence of the impact of their pedagogical practices in student work. Our consultant partners, TCRWP and Metamorphasis will also meet with grade teams and grade bands during site visits and through off-site PD. On a weekly basis during Professional Development on Monday's, Grade teams will follow protocols for looking at student work that push them to identify and celebrate best practices while also identifying areas of support and implications for instructional next steps. Teachers September 2018-June 2019 2 Administration Peer Mentor Model Teacher Teachers Achievement Coaches Administration Peer Mentor Model Teacher Teachers Achievement Coaches Peer collaborative teachers, model teachers and NTC mentors assigned to specific grades bands will support professional learning of all staff members focused on meeting the needs of all learners through our Professional Development Plan. Teachers September 2018-June 2019 Workshops will be provided to parents with translations of current initiatives. Literacy training and activities will build a strong school to home connection . Families will be provided with community based organizations and City and district workshops focused on literacy services. Parents Families September 2017-June 2018 All teachers will maintain Unit Plans and student data on our Google Drive in order to monitor student progress and make adjustments to instruction. Teachers will highlight changes and adaptations in Google Drive to keep a record of how they are adapting curriculum to meet the needs of all learners. Teachers September 2018-June 2019 Administration Peer mentor Model Teacher Teachers Achievement Coaches Administration Peer Mentor Model Teacher Teachers Achievement Coaches Administration Peer Mentor Model teacher Data Specialist Administration 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Throughout the year, we will provide workshops to parents during Family Engagement time that focus on ways to support students at home. These workshops will be provided by the grade level teams and help families understand ways to support student learning outside of school. Teachers will have ongoing conversations with families about student achievement. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Achievement Coaches will be funded with Tax Levy/Title 1 Funding. NTC mentor funded with Tax Levy/Title 1 Funding 3  Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, all teachers in collaboration with administration, will meet in Grade Teams weekly to modify annual, unit and daily lesson plans to ensure that instructional plans address all students goals and needs as measured by a 5% increase in End of Unit assessments in ELA and Math. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. End of Unit Assessments Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 4  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Our Advance Teacher Performance data also suggests that we have work to do in Danielson Domain 3 - our average Teacher Scores from Classroom Observations for Measures of Teacher Practice where as follows: Domain 3 Overall 2.24 3B: Questioning and Discussion Techniques 2.28 3C: Engaging Students in Learning 3D: Using Assessment in Instruction 2.18 2.27 Based on preliminary NYS Testing Data for SY17-18, 81% of students met the cut scores in ELA representing an 11% increase and and 80% met the cut scores in Math representing a 2 percent increase. In order to maximize time spent on improving student outcomes, we need to use a comprehensive data system that will allow us to track student performance. This will allow us to monitor and revise school-wide plans in an effort to ensure that our school-wide work is impacting student achievement(5.1). In our 2016-7 Quality Review, we were proficient in Assessment Practices (2.2) and would like to continue to build on this strength to refine our practices in translating to student achievement results. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, CS44 Administration will engage in frequent cycles of evidence-based observations that provide specific, timely and accurate feedback to teachers and plan for strategically designed professional development opportunities 5  aligned to identified needs from those cycles of observation resulting in a 5% increase in student proficiency on NYS ELA and Math exams. 6  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff)  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  CS44 Administration will meet with every teacher for an Initial Planning Conference. During this conference, we will review last year's data on student performance (MOSL) and teacher performance (MOTP) to develop a yearlong professional learning goal and action plan. This goal will be recorded in our TeachBoost system. CS44 Administration will create an internal yearlong observation schedule with six cycles that ensure that all teachers are seen consistently throughout the year based on their observation options. During each observation, CS44 Administration will collect low-inference data, student work, and lesson plans to provide specific and accurate feedback to teachers. Low-inference notes will be maintained in TeachBoost. After each observation, teachers will meet face-to-face with Administration for a debrief within three calendar days for feedback. CS44 Administration will select two Peer Collaborative (who are also NTC Mentors) and Two Model teachers to serve on the Instructional Cabinet and in Teacher Leadership roles. These staff members will work with Administration to support the Rigorous Instructional Goal on this CEP through lab classrooms, one-to-one coaching, and leading professional learning. Teacher leaders will log their support in TeachBoost. Teacher leaders will maintain a log of the support provided to teachers in TeachBoost, including concrete action steps for instructional goals. This log will be accessible to Administration, Teacher Leaders, and the staff member receiving the support. Teacher leaders will work collaboratively with CS44 Administration during Instructional Cabinet meetings to target school-wide needs and develop a professional development plan that balances both school-wide and individual learning needs. Teachers September 2018 Administration Administration Administration September 2018 Administration Administration September 2018-June 2019 Administration Administration NTC Mentors, Teacher Leaders September 2018-June 2019 NTC Mentors Administration, Teacher Leaders Administration, Teacher Leaders September 2018-June 2019 Teacher Leaders, Administration CS44 Administration will hold four data meetings throughout the year with teachers and develop action plans to ensure that student achievement is increasing. Collaborative action planning will also allow Administration the opportunity to Administration, Teachers November 2018, January 2019, and Administration 7 identify and target any additional areas of teacher support needed. Throughout the year, we will monitor and revise the action steps and make adjustments if necessary. March 2019, May 2019 Administration September 2018-June 2019 Administration 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. We will develop an internal data system with our data specialist to track student performance data. Information will be shared with parents through monthly newsletters, curriculum events, and training on promoting good learning/study skills at home. Progress reports will be sent home in January. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. FSF and Title 1 for Teacher Leadership positions Data specialist funding, New Teacher Center Mentor Program funded by FSF Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, teacher leaders/mentors will be developed across the different grades and content areas to build and cultivate instructional best practices in other adult learners resulting in a 5% increase in NYS ELA and Math exams. We will measure this with the use of IReady and other data sources (F&P, unit tests) Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Progress monitoring data Summative Assessment data (F&P Benchmark levels, end of unit math tests, NYS ELA and Math tests, IReady benchmark reports) Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 8  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. On our 2016-17NYC School Survey, Family-Community Ties was our strongest element score with a rating of 3.24. Our 2017-18 average attendance rate was 88%. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, there will be a 50% increase in parent involvement. CS44 will offer parent workshops and engagement activities on a weekly basis. We will assess parent involvement and engagement every 4-6 weeks using agendas and monitoring the number of participants on sign in sheets. 9  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  We will implement our 21st Century Grant Award through the Office of Community Schools. We will work to establish a partnership with Phipps Neighborhood at our school-site. Students Parents July 2018 - September 2019 Parent Coordinator and Social Worker will work with Community Schools Director to develop a yearlong calendar of events to engage and support families. Students Parents September - October 2018 Parent Coordinator and Social Worker will work with Community Schools Director to identify resources available to families and develop a ongoing community strategy to share information about these resources. We will continue to use Blackboard Connect and our electronic display boards to share messages. Community Schools Director and Parent Coordinator will share information about the plan with teachers. Parent Coordinator and Community Schools Director will send updates when available to staff to inform them about programs. Students Parents September 2018-June 2019 We will track student attendance daily and have monthly attendance meetings that focus specifically on chronic absenteeism and how to support identified families within the plan developed. We will also look for individualized supports as necessary for identified families. Chronically Absent Students September 2018-June 2019 Attendance team will share next steps from the meeting with teachers who have identified chronically absent students in their classes. Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Administration Parent Coordinator Phipps Parent Coordinator Community Schools Director Guidance Counselor Parent Coordinator Community Schools Director Guidance Counselor Community Schools Director Social Worker Attendance Teacher Parent Coordinator Administration School Aides 0 In addition to our CBO partnership, we will continue our partnership with Cary Leeds Tennis Center and LEAP workshops for our families. These organizations will bring in additional supports and learning. Cary Leeds works with our families and students on fitness and nutrition. LEAP works with our families on stress management and language support. Parent Coordinator PE Teacher September 2018- June 2019 Administration Parent Coordinator Social Worker Administration 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. Phipps Neighborhoods Cary Leeds Center for Tennis and Learning Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Blackboard Connect, Per Session , Community Based Organizations, Substitute Teachers, per diem, supervisor per session. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E X X Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2018, CS44 will establish partnerships with Community Based Organizations - Phipps Neighborhoods and Cary Leeds Center for Tennis and Learning. We will measure success of these partnerships through a 10% reduction in our chronic absenteeism rate. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Teacher teams will offer at least two parent workshops per grade for a total of 12 workshops. Agendas, sign in sheets, parent communication with school staff. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 1  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) RTI screener IReady Mathematics RTI screener IReady Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Fountas and Pinnell Leveled Literacy Curriculum Guided Reading Groups Engage NY Curriculum supports Teacher-created curriculum Science End of unit assessments Teacher-created curriculum Classroom teacher observations Social Studies End of unit assessments Teacher-created curriculum Classroom teacher observations At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Incident Reports At-risk speech Referrals from staff At-risk counseling Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Small group During school day After school During school day After school During school day During school day During school day One-to-one instruction Tutoring Small group One-to-one instruction Tutoring Small group One-to-one instruction Tutoring Small group One-to-one instruction Tutoring Small group One-to-one instruction Tutoring 2  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 85 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. Academic and social emotional intervention, including but not limited to Tier 1 and 2 instruction, at-risk counseling, and information on community based organizations that provide parental support. Workshops for parents and students on CCLS and other initiatives. Additional school supplies will be provided and financial support for participation in extended activities such as field trips. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). NA 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 3  NA 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. NA 4  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. A hiring committee will be developed to support administration in hiring well qualified teachers who match the culture of the school. Professional development opportunities through a partnership with Teachers College Reading and Writing Project, Metamorphosis, and our in-house achievement coaches will allow staff to build capacity within their practice. Administration will provide frequent feedback on teaching practice and engage in reflective conversations with staff regarding next steps. In particular training from the New Teacher Center will offer support to New Teachers around classroom instruction and analyzing data. •CS44 will become a learning community where teachers are empowered as professionals to engage in dialogue with their colleagues about pedagogical practices through grade team meetings. Teachers will be regularly observed using the Danielson Framework for teaching and receive timely and actionable feedback. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). At CS44, we are continually seeking out knowledge to help build our understanding of the CCLS. We are working on internal study groups and participating in external study groups with in conjunction with the district and city. We frequently attend workshops outside of CS44 and turkey the information during staff development and lunch and learns. Teachers will have the opportunity throughout the year to attend workshops based on their interest in developing, feedback from administration, and reviews completed from city and state officials. Professional Development will also be facilitated by Teachers College Reading and Writing Project consultants, New Teacher Mentoring Office and the Borough Field Office. NTC will provided additional support to first year teachers helping to ensure that they have all the necessary training to be successful. NTC will also continue to build capacity of highly qualified teachers by giving mentors additional training to continue to build their craft as they support other staff 5  members who are new to the professional. Teaching teachers is a skill that will allow highly qualified teachers to refine and reflect on their own craft. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). Pre-Kindergarten teachers are responsible for providing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core expectations. Pre-Kindergarten teachers participate in all K-5 CCLS Professional Development and learn best practices with our elementary school teachers. Workshops are created for Pre K parents throughout the school year with a focus on language, social emotional growth, and transitioning to a community school. Students who require additional academic support are evaluated before turning 5. 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. Teachers participated in a committee to select the assessment programs that were aligned with our curriculum and the CCLS. We are using multiple data points and creating data action plans to really understand the individualized needs of each of our scholars. Our in-house achievement coach and data specialist are supporting teachers to analyze the results and plan for instruction. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the 6  consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local $256,848 $48,270 $11,200 $1,747,748 X X X X X Column B Section Reference(s) Section 5 Section 5 Section 5 Section 5 Section 5 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 7  2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 8  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. PS 44 in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. CS44 will support parents and families of Title I students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students  providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math and use of technology;  providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and  decision making in support of the education of their children; fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress;  providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments;  sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand;  providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; 9  The school’s Parent Involvement Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will:  actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact;  engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills;  ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and  strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills;  maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability grade-level curriculum and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home;   provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, Progress Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report;  host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the lementary and Secondary Education Act. schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings, with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed;   0  conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement  holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference;  hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year;  encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; supporting or hosting Family Day events;   establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents;  encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers;  providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress;  developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress;  providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between /teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) School-Parent Compact (SPC) CS 44, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. 1. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum 1  Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards;  using academic learning time efficiently;    offering high quality instruction in all content areas;  providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act. I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by:     conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education;  providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact;   providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information;  ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff  ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents;  notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; 2  arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities;  planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; Provide general support to parents by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents    creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering will all members of the school community; supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents;   ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as  described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Every Student Succeeds Act.Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; 2. II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities  monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent;  ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games;     promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits;  encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child;   participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education;  communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested;   become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact;  participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; 3    take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; 3. Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities       attend school regularly and arrive on time; complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; show respect for myself, other people and property; try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; always try my best to learn. 4  Addendum: Community School Partnerships Directions: The Community School (CS) strategy is directly aligned to the Framework for Great Schools. Community Schools bring schools and community partners together and integrate academics, health, youth development, and family engagement to provide students with the tools and opportunities they need to succeed. The Core Services in Community Schools are Expanded Learning Time (ELT), Attendance Supports, Family Engagement, and Health & Wellness. Part 1 – Community School Partnerships Goal(s) How is the CS strategy integrated into academic instruction at your school, and what impact has it had on student academic outcomes? CS44 is in the second year of our partnership with the Office of Community Schools and Phipps Neighborhoods. We are hoping that this partnership will help address issues of chronic absenteeism as well as improve our daily attendance rates at CS44. Last year, our average attendance rate was 89%. We are also hoping that this partnership will help bring resources to our school community to support with mental health and social emotional learning. This will be our second year collaborating with CS44. For this upcoming school year we will work in collaboration with the schools administrative team to align our supports with the 2018-2019 Comprehensive Education Plan (CEP). Phipps Neighborhoods will support academic progress via our Student Advocate Model. We will hire three Student Advocates who will be assigned a caseload of students in each grade cohort to provide targeted academic interventions. The Student Advocates will be assigned to plan and partner with school staff and teachers to support students via success mentoring, classroom push-in's, small-group instruction, ELT, tutoring and mentoring to promote and offer healthy academic and behavioral progress. Student advocates will also offer one on one check ins with students on their caseloads to develop Individual Achievement Plans to set goals for the school year in Academics, Behavior, and Attendance. The expectation is that students will thrive with the additional support and will begin to take on a more positive view of both their abilities and their future capabilities. Indicate the summative goal(s) of the Community School for the 2018-19 school year. Be sure to construct the goal to be SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Realistic, and Time-bound. As a result of our partnership with Phipps Neighborhood and the services provided, we would like to increase the average yearly attendance rate by 5%, from 89% to 94% by end of 2018-2019 school year. Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Community School Annual Goal(s): How will achieving your Community School Goal(s)--in Expanded Learning Time (ELT), Attendance Supports, Family Engagement, and Health & Wellness--support your academic goals for students? We will be achieving the Community Schools Goal through the following... *60 students in grades 3-5 will be offered Expanded Learning Time through an afterschool program that will be offered Monday - Friday by Phipps Neighborhoods. *We will have additional support to help provide services to families - a Community Schools Director, Assistant Community Schools Director, and 3 Educational Advocates will be available during the school day to provide additional supports to families who have been identified with chronic absenteeism. *Phipps will be working with our Parent Coordinator to increase the frequency of parent programming and also introduce new resources to the community. 5  As described above, Phipps Neighborhoods at Community School CS44 will implement a full service Community School Model via our Student Advocate model as well as utilize resources and other Community Based partners at the school. CS44 will be supported by an After School Program.This program targets 3rd to 5th graders to assist with their transition and success from elementary to middle school, while providing opportunities for them to be mentored by 8th graders. The after school program will be offering Academic Enrichment via homework help, tutoring, social emotional learning, Service and Project Based Learning, and extra-curricular activities. Part 2 – Community School Partnerships Core Services Action Plan Part 2a. Identify the Community-based Organization (CBO) partnerships that you will develop in ELT, Attendance Supports, Family Engagement, and Health & Wellness, their target student population(s), and scope of the services provided. As well as supporting schools’ supportive environment and attendance work, CBOs should be helping to support your school’s instructional focus. Target Population Scope of Service SY18-19 SMART Goal K-5 Students STEM Science Academic Advancement CBO Partnership Omni Learn Community Change SOBRO Teachers, Student Advocates, Students 3rd-5th Grade Students Social Emotional Learning Youth Development Training Hydroponics Social Emotional Learning; Behavioral Improvement STEM; Academic Advancement Health & Wellbeing; Attendance Improvement Leake and Watts K-5 Students Mental Health Part 3 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 3a. Indicate resources your Community Partnership will leverage to achieve your summative SMART goal(s) and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 21CCLC Extended School Day grant; Phipps Neighborhoods provides the following services and can refer student family and community members: English for Speakers of Other Languages (ESOL) and Pre-High School Equivalency (HSE) & HSE prep classes to help participants learn English and work toward a high school diploma while building practical life and work-ready skills. Language & Literacy participants have easy access to other Phipps Neighborhoods programs and services, such as college advisement, computer instruction, tutoring, and financial counseling. Career Network: Healthcare is a career development program that helps young adults (16-24) secure healthcare-related employment and/or education credentials. Phipps Neighborhoods has partnered with Montefiore Health 6  System and Hostos Community College to provide career exploration and experiential instruction focused on the participants’ interests. Summer Youth Employment: Each year since 1995, the Phipps Neighborhoods Summer Youth Employment Program has provided young people aged 16-24 with a meaningful employment experience, as well as a summer income. The Phipps Neighborhoods Financial Empowerment Center provides confidential, one-on-one counseling for individuals who need tools and support to better manage their finances. Trained counselors help clients identify their financial challenges and guide them in addressing bad credit, paying down debt, and improving financial habits. Phipps Neighborhoods, in partnership with VITA, offers free tax preparation to individuals who worked or received unemployment in the previous year, earned less than $20,000 with no dependents, or earned less than $53,000 with a dependent. Services are offered at various Phipps Neighborhoods locations throughout the Bronx from January 28th through April 15th. Phipps Neighborhoods programs and services fill some of the most critical needs in our communities. Free walk-in services and a wide range of education and enrichment programs are available to the public. Services include: • Adult Basic Education/Pre-HSE • After-School • College Access • Computer Training • ESOL • Financial Counseling • Head Start • Literacy Connection • NYC Justice Corps • Social Services • Summer Camp • Tax Preparation • Teen Programs Transitional Housing & Placement Services Phipps Neighborhoods operates two Tier II transitional housing shelters through contracts with the NYC Department of Homeless Services. Families are referred to the shelters by the New York City Department of Homeless Services (DHS) and assisted by Phipps Neighborhoods housing specialists to locate affordable, permanent homes. Phipps Neighborhoods shelters have a solid record of successfully placing families in homes and have been recognized by DHS for strong performance. Referrals are only accepted from DHS for transitional & supportive housing. On-site support services include:  Childcare Life skills   Medical and mental health referrals  Recreational programming  Education and employment assistance to help parents achieve economic independence and self-sufficiency 7  Part 3b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) Title I SWP Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside X 21st Century SIG Grant School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 3c. Describe how the school will partner with the Lead CBO to do the following: 1. Community Schools are expected to partner with a community-based partner organization (CBO) and together with members of the School Leadership Team, hire a Community School Director. The Director will lead implementation of the asset and needs assessment process, and other critically important coordinating activities. Indicate how you will leverage this aspect of the work. Community Schools are expected to personalize the needs of all students, through strategic programming and services, as determined by the asset and needs assessment, and must also offer Expanded Learning Time (ELT) and mental health programming. In completing this section, ensure that you think about how: (1) the right services are provided to the right students and families at the right time; and (2) how you will seamlessly coordinate services with instructional programming happening throughout and outside of the school day. Indicate how you will implement this work, and describe other programming you anticipate to be in place to strengthen this initiative. Community Schools are expected to emerge as Partnership Schools, which are places where parents and families feel welcome, actively participate in the conversation and decision-making around the renewal of their schools, and have many opportunities to advocate for their children. Monthly meetings and Community School Forums engaging families and community stakeholders will be a critical part of this family engagement strategy. Describe how you will implement this aspect of the work. Community School Principals are expected to meet on a weekly basis with their Community School Director, select Assistant Principals, key staff, and other CBOs, to analyze trends in data and case manage individual students. Data tools – including the New Visions Data Sorter - and training will be available for schools to use. Indicate how you will implement this aspect of the work. 2. 3. 4. 1. CS44 in partnership with Phipps has hired a Community School Director (CSD) who began in the role in the end of August. The Director will lead the implementation of the asset and needs assessment process, and work to coordinate the provision of services and resources that Phipps has access to within the CS44 Community. The CSD will meet with Administration on a weekly basis and serve on the School Leadership Team. 2. Expanded Learning time will be offered to 60 students in grades 3-5. We will work with Phipps to provide mental health services to our students. Phipps will partner with our PBIS team and our existing Guidance Counselor and Bridging the Gap Social Worker to be a partner in supporting our students who are in crisis. In addition, the hiring of three educational advocates that will be available during the school day will allow us to work more intensively to support students and families and align resources. 3. We are currently working to create a family engagement schedule. Our CSD will be meeting with our Parent Coordinator to make a schedule or programming that will be available throughout the year. 4. We will use all data tools available to gain more information about our students and plan for supports available. 8  The CSD will work together with the schools administration and guidance team to identify the students who need the most support in but not limited to the following areas:  Attendance  Academics Social Emotional Support   Mental Health & Wellness  Special Education & IEP From this group of students, staff will work to assign interventions and mentors (Student Advocates) to support the work ahead. Data will be used to inform and guide decision making , specifically the student sorter will assist us with identifyingstudents that need additional support. The CSD will convene monthly stakeholder meetings to ensure that all services are complimenting one another and aligned with the CEP. Weekly Principal, staff and attendance meetings will take place separately to ensure supports on the ground are being effectively executed. The CBO will also have routine check in’s regarding spending and expenditures to ensure spending is happening as planned and in alignment with the CEP. Part 4 – Community School Partnerships Oversight Part 4a. Key Staff and Partners 1. Name and describe the scope of involvement of all community partners working in the school (include partners supporting ELT, counseling, enrichment, etc.) 2. Name the members of your Community School Team and how meetings will be organized and structured to engage all stakeholders and be focused on results. 3. Explain data strategies including the use of the data sorter, and steps that the school will take to ensure that the appropriate interventions are provided to the right students 1. We are new to the school and have not solidified all of the partners. Some that we know we have already are: o South Bronx Rising Together o NY Cares o OmniLearn o Phipps Neighborhoods: Academic, Attendance, Social Emotional Development and Family Engagement o CSD will be creating a family engagement document to track all family engagement. o Phipps will be hosting monthly resource days. This will give parents and members of the community the opportunity to come in and request different services. These request will then turn into partnerships with different organizations. o The focus this year is around attendance, parent engagement, and academic improvement. Part 4b. Indicate resources needed including human resources, instructional resources, and schedule adjustments to implement the Community School program. Develop implementation plan 9  Develop whole year calendar for parent and student activities Strategies around attendance and how to ensure that we have a big turn out on the first day Having planning meetings with school staff in order to ensure that we are aligning ourselves with the needs of the students and their families. DOE Specific Trainings and support for CBO Staff Success Mentoring opportunities for teachers and school staff Restorative Practice Resources to support reductions in suspensions. Part 4c. Timeline for implementation and completion, including start and end dates. Programming will begin no later than October 16, 2017 and end on June 15, 2018 Planning and implementation will take place in Between September 1, 2017 and October 16, 2017. We are aiming to be proactive as much as possible to get this new partnership off the ground. Part 4d. Mental Health Work Plan Separate from this S/CEP, schools will complete a Mental Health Work Plan that will become an addendum to this document. 0  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 1  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: Rationale & Program Objective: The focus of the program is to help students progress in all areas of English New Language (listening, speaking, reading and writing) to ultimately achieve English proficiency. Instruction targets specific groups such as newcomers and long term ELL students by differentiated instruction in a small group settings in order to increase student academic achievement. Scholars will develop projects based on various topics through the use of fiction and non-fiction texts, computer based technologies, and hands on experiences. The program serves ELL scholars in diverse ways. The program gives scholars the opportunity to gain experience with current computer and iPad technology, fosters communication through collaborative team based work, and allows for higher understanding on how to acquire and apply information through a variety of texts: newspapers, magazines, books, and articles. Scholars will participate in activities that allow them to identify and use a variety of supportive strategies. Scholars will be better equipped for the ELA and NYSESLAT State testing by applying the strategies they acquired in the Title III program. Parents will be invited to participate in multiple scholar based and teacher led Title III presentations and workshops. These initiatives will give the parents an opportunity to participate in their child's English language acquisition efforts and gain a better understanding of the program. Subgroups and Grade Levels of Students to be Served: All C.S.44 ELL Scholars in grades kindergarten through fifth are invited to participate in the Title III after school program. Scholars are in two main subgroups. "Subgroup A" consists of scholars in grades kindergarten, first, and second. "Subgroup B" consists of scholars in grades third, fourth, and fifth. Within the subgroups scholars are organized into smaller groups that are based on both their proficiency levels and personal academic strengths. In the smaller groups there will be a focus on instruction in order to meet scholar's specific needs, such as the needs of a newcomer or the needs of a long term ELL. We currently have 50 scholars who are designated as ENL learners. In Grades K-2, we have the following breakdowns: Entering: 8 Emerging: 2 Transitioning: 6 Expanding: 14 Commanding: 0 In Grades 3-5, we have the following breakdowns: Entering: 4 Emerging: 2 Transitioning: 6 Expanding: 6 Commanding: 2 2  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Schedule & Duration:The program will begin on October 11, 2018 and will run until March 29, 2019. It will take place two days a week on Thursday and Fridays, starting at 2:35 pm and concluding at 4:00 pm. Thursdays will service ELL scholars grades kindergarten, first, and second. Fridays will service ELL scholars grades third, fourth, and fifth. Supervisor will be paid per session as part of this plan from 3-4 PM. We will have 40 sessions with one certified ENL teacher and a common branch teacher. Language of Instruction:The Title III program primary language is English, with additional iPad and technology based supports added in students native language. Students will receive support in their native language, if necessary. Number of Certified Teachers:One certified ENL teacher and a common branch teacher will facilitate the program. We will also have one supervisor for the program. Records for attendance will be maintained by the classroom teacher and administration. All notifications sent home to families will be in both English and Spanish. Types of Materials:The school is purchasing the following materials for the Title III program: -NYSESLAT practice assessment materials: Will be used periodically to teach scholars assessment taking strategies while acclimating them to how the NYSESLAT is laid out. -iPads: Will be used to support ELLs in multiple ways. iPads will be used by the students while researching and creating their academic projects. iPads will be used by parents during parental engagement activities to inform parents on how to use and support student growth at home using specific applications and programs. -Text Materials: Newspapers, Magazines, and informational texts that will be used by students. -Art Supplies: (as needed) poster boards, chart markers, etc., will be used by students in order to complete assignments. -All records regarding attendance and student assessment will be kept on file. Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: Rationale: In order to continue learning and developing our professional teaching craft, teachers at C.S. 44 will be given opportunities to participate in professional developments that focus on English Language Learners. Professional development will be given to the certified ENL teacher, as well as teachers that service ELL students. The certified ENL teacher will participate in multiple professional development forums hosted at the school and outside the school throughout the school year. Some example of professional development workshops are those that are hosted by the Teacher's College Reading and Writing Project (TCRWP), District 12, Bronx Field Support Center, and DOE Office of ELLS. During the school year, at least two professional developments will be given to the C.S. 44 staff that focus specifically on English Language Learners. The professional developments are scheduled to take place during Monday professional development hours and will last 80 minutes. Topics that will be covered during the Title III professional developments are; understanding the 3  Part C: Professional Development struggles of an ELL, methods on how to incorporate current technology applications and programs through the use of iPads to support ELL scholars, how to better differentiate for an ELL, along with strategies that teachers can use in the classroom. In addition, on a weekly basis the ENL teacher works with the classroom teachers giving them direct professional development on better supporting ELL students. Topics that are supported during this time revolve around how mainstream teachers specifically support ELL students during everyday instruction and by giving them strategies that they can incorporate into their lessons. Teachers to Receive Training:All teachers that service ELL scholars will be given professional development training. Schedule and Duration:During the School year, the certified ENL teacher will receive training outside of school through professional development forums and workshops. C.S. 44 teachers that work with ELL scholars but are not the certified ENL teacher will participate in at least two professional developments that focus on English Language Learners. Ongoing professional development is given weekly by the ENL teacher that works directly with classroom teachers servicing ELLs. Professional Developments will take place on Mondays for the duration of 80 minutes; starting at 2:35pm and run until 3:55pm. CS44 is also focused on professional learning that helps teachers meet the needs of all learners. As such, embedded professional development will be provided on Monday and Tuesday and during grade teams meetings to support this work. We are also working with TCRWP. This support will be at no-cost to the Title III program but is ongoing support to help support teachers in working with ENL scholars and raising student achievement. Topics to be Covered:Some topics that will be covered during the Title III professional developments are; understanding the struggles of ELL students, who are students with interrupted formal education, using technology to support ELL scholars, and how to differentiate for an ELL.All records regarding professional development will be kept on file (name of participant, date attended, agenda). Name of Provider:District 12, Bronx Field Support CenterDOE Office of ELLSIréna Harris, ENL Teacher/Coordinator, CS 044Teacher's College Reading and Writing Project Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: Rationale: C.S. 44 hopes to encourage parental involvement in scholar’s academic careers. We have selected specific times to invite parents to share in an academic experience with their children. During this time we will share information about the program, give them strategies and activities that they can do at home to support learning, and show them computer applications they can use at home to engage their child in English acquisition. We believe that through continuous involvement, parents will be more adept to participate in their child’s school life. 4  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Schedule & Duration:There will be at least 5 parental engagement activities. The schedule meetings will take place in October 2018, November 2018, December 2018, February 2019, and March 2019. Topics to be Covered: October: Information about the Title III Program objectives. November: Strategies and activities to do at home to support learning. December: Showcase student work- Celebration! February: Preparing for NYSESLAT March: Showcase student work - Celebration! Name of Provider:Iréna Harris, ENL Teacher/Coordinator and Ms. Verdejo, Parent Coordinator. How Parents will be Notified of These Activities:Notices will go home with each scholar that gives information in English and their native language. Scholars will also create invitations that they will give to their parents inviting them to join in on the activities. Teacher will maintain records of all meetings including agendas, attendance sheets, and invitations in both languages. Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits) NA  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL NA NA NA NA NA NA Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. NA NA NA NA NA NA NA 5  6  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 12 School Name David C. Farragut Borough Bronx School Number 044 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Melissa Harrow Coach Althea Redwood ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Irena Harris Teacher/Subject Area Kelly Garzione/Grade 4 ELA Teacher/Subject Area NA Related-Service Provider NA Superintendent Rafaela Espinal Assistant Principal Cheryl Hall Coach Gloria Ford Anderson School Counselor Lauren Fotinos Parent NA Parent Coordinator Aritza Verdejo Field Support Center Staff Member NA Other (Name and Title) NA C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 0 N/A Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification 0 Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 2 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics 7  Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 280 Total number of ELLs 50 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 17.86% Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 1 2 4 3 0 0 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? Assessment results provide school staff with information on which students are to be targeted for small group (4-6 students) intervention and Academic Intervention Services (AIS). At C.S 44 the I-Ready program is used as a school wide assessment for ELA and math. It provides a comprehensive technology diagnostic into student growth and performance. It helps teachers differentiate instruction and guide areas to focus on. Other assessments; Fountas and Pinnell (F&P), the New York City Measure of Student Learning (MOSL), Teachers College assessments, and teacher created assessments are used in order to assess the early literacy skills of our English as New Language Learners (ENLs). Insight on the above stated data provided is information regarding students' level of reading comprehension, fluency, reading accuracy, and letter/word recognition. NYSESLAT testing data is used to individually assess each modality of Speaking, Listening, Reading and Writing (SLRW). This assessment also illustrates language gains or needs through the SLRW modalities. Spanish LAB results 8  demonstrate native language literacy skills and are analyzed and considered for newcomer ENLs to indicate the level of competency in students' native language. The above listed data along with students' class work performance, is very important to our school's instructional plan as it allows teachers to analyze scholars' strengths and needs in order to devise the most beneficial educational plan. Throughout the school year, curriculum embedded performance tasks are utilized to analyze student understanding of current content being taught and assists teachers in assessing student learning. ENL students, particularly in grades 3-5 have shown the need for additional support with academic vocabulary in grade level texts, words which have multiple meanings, and comprehension of complex text. Writing assessments indicate the need for further assistance in logically organizing ideas, particularly with concerns of flowing sentences and paragraphs and writing mechanics. NYSESLAT test preparation reviled that ENL students at all levels are struggling with listening comprehension skills, sentence structure, using prepositions and appositives, as well as sequencing events. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? Data from (above stated) assessments is used to plan instruction based on individual student strengths and/or needs. Data is also used to gauge how students are acquiring literacy skills, foundational and language skills and acquiring vocabulary. Additionally, these assessments analyze how students are processing and developing comprehension of texts. Data from assessments is used to determine and target students to receive intervention services:Classroom, cluster and AIS teachers form small groups (4-6 students) to target and plan instruction specific for additional, individualized support in areas of need based on complete data results. I-Ready independent, personalized instruction is provided in reading and math, specifically targeted to students' levels and unique areas of needs, both in ELA and math. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? Areas of need benchmarks to understand where students are and where they should be are determined through analyzing a variety of school wide data; weekly analysis of student writing, review of I-Ready program in reading and math, F&P, and State exam scores, including ELA, Math and NYSESLAT. Additional assessments evaluated are baseline predictive and periodic assessments, NYC performance tasks and MOSL, all of which gauge students learning at the starting point at the beginning of the school year and ending point at the end of the school year to determine growth, improvement or needs. Additionally, data from the RLAT reveals specific growth and gains through each SLRW modality from the NYSESLAT assessment. Each year annual measurable achievement objectives based on NYSESLAT assessment result from the previous school year are illustrated on the EDAT, showing growth/gains in each of the four modalities. Analyzing school wide data, reviewing State scores and a variety of other assessments throughout the school year against benchmarks help us to clearly understand where scholars are, and where they should be. In general, ENL students continue to need additional support in vocabulary in order to be successful in reading and responding to grade level text in a variety of genres, as well as in content areas; math, social studies and science. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? Data drives our school's literacy instructional plan. It provides evidence of learning and achieving. It alerts us as to which scholars should be considered for intervention. Small leveled groups are formed based on the data, in order to support specific literacy skills: Once the summative data has been gathered, it provides evidence of student learning and achievement. It is used to gauge progress in phonetic awareness, foundational and language skills, developing vocabulary, processing and comprehending text. This information is analyzed to target students who will be provided intervention. It is used to plan instruction based on students' needs. Small (4-5 student to teacher ratio), leveled groups are formed based on specific needs by classroom teachers, cluster and AIS support personnel, targeting instruction to specific needs to support and bolster student learning and 9  success. With on-going teacher assessment results, groups are flexible, with changes occurring as needed. Further support is afforded ENL students during the Title III after school, where targeted intervention is provided in order to build on the core school day instruction, intervention and provide additional mediation is provided and on-going assessment and progress is monitored. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] Our RtI framework is inclusive of all scholars. We have a school-wide screener that is used to identify scholars who are at risk. Collected data is used to hone in on specific issues for intervention. If an English language learner scores below specified levels of performance on the annual English language proficiency assessment, we determine additional interventions and activities targeted to their individual needs. We have a part-time AIS provider who provides smaller student to teacher ratio services to scholars who are in need of academic supports. We are also working to strengthen Tier One instruction by implementing school-wide instructional non-negotiables, such as specific targeted feedack designed for each student at their level. In order to establish a home-school partnership to benefit the student in academic development or achievement we also reach out to parents. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. State exams; NYSESLAT, ELA, Math, Science (grade 4) and periodic assessments are outcome assessments used to evaluate and inform our ENL program Data patterns across performance levels reveal scholars, particularly in the upper grades are in need of additional support in language acquisition, reading, writing and content area. The RLAT report and The EDAT tool provide beneficial data related to ENLs. The EDAT tool is designed to allow our school to download three ATS reports and then provides us with a summary of our school's status and student achievement and progress. The EDAT also assists us in targeting instructional programs to accelerate achievement among our ENLs. Spring 2017 results illustrate the following NYSESLAT progress: - 3 test takers scored commanding - 7 test takers advanced 1 proficiency level - 2 test takers advanced 2 proficiency levels - 11 test takers remained at the same proficiency level - 1 test taker regressed 1 proficiency level As the EDAT tool provides strengths and needs, and data patterns on the NYSESLAT, Information on this tool illustrates students need additional support in the speaking modality in order to be able to to articulate with native like fluency and to be able to take part in a variety of rich, structured conversations. Listening modality results indicate a number of students need to build listening stamina in order to comprehend spoken English, respond to others, analyze and synthesize a variety of ideas and content based information. In analyzing the reading modality results, weaknesses are noted in reading grade level, content area texts with sufficient comprehension. The writing modality illustrates the greatest challenge, particularly in grades 3, 4 and 5 in responding to text based questions with text based details, organizing information and using conventions of English correctly. In general students across proficiency levels achieved as follows on State exams in Spring 2017: - ELA levels in Grade 3-5: 5 (students exempt), 9 scored level 1, 3 scored level 2 and 1 (commanding) scored level 4 - State Math levels consisted of 1 and 2, with one commanding student achieving a level 3 and one commanding student achieving level 4. - Grade 4 science scores were as follows: three students achieved level 3, two students scored level 2, five students scored level 1. - ELA, Math and Science performance levels within the subgroups of newcomers, long term ENLs and Special Ed.: students generally scored level 1 on the State ELA, Math and Science exam. 0  Based on the above stated data, CS 44 administrators and teachers analyze, discuss and create instructional plans and interventions to address specific needs of ENLs. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? School leadership and teachers meet on a regular basis, during Monday professional time and during grade meetings in order to analyze outcome assessment results to identify areas of strengths and needs and to target specific supports for scholars. Assessments given students throughout the year play a crucial role in tracking growth in teaching and learning, identifying gaps and trends, and monitoring academic progress along the way. Data from assessments offer understanding of how scholars are absorbing information on a regular basis, with Instructional adjustments continuously made based on student performance. After reviewing RLAT and EDAT data findings and information, instructional objectives and ENL student grouping is created for optimum student instruction and/or intervention: Data is used to plan instruction, differentiate instructional materials and formulate groups based on outcome assessments (see question #6 above): - Small groups (4-6) of students are formed for instruction and intervention based on specific needs and levels by classroom, cluster teachers and AIS providers - ENL teacher collaborates with classroom and content area teachers to provide integrated ESL services and interventions using ESL strategies and methodology in ELA, and content area subjects. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. At CS 44, ENL students are provided language support in the four modalities (listening, speaking, reading, and writing) utilizing ENL strategies to teach and reinforce language skills through the content areas. ENL integrated and stand alone ENL services are provided by certified ENL teachers. RLAT and EDAT reports are analyzed, reviewed and used to create instructional decisions for our ENL students. Through articulation and collaboration with classroom and cluster/content area teachers, planning cohesive instruction is prepared and delivered based on units of learning being taught. ENL students are grouped by grade and proficiency levels as follows: - Kindergarten: one group of stand-alone mixed proficiency levels - Grade 1: one group of stand-alone mixed proficiency levels - Grade 2: two groups of integrated mixed proficiency levels - Grade 3: one group of mixed proficiency levels - Grade 4/5: one group of stand alone mixed proficiency levels - Grade 4/5: one group of stand alone Entering/Emerging proficiency levels - Grade 5: one group integrated (math) mixed proficiency levels b. TBE program. If applicable. Paste response to questions here: 1  c. DL program. If applicable. Paste response to questions here: 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? Ms. Harrow, Principal of CS 44 ensures ENLs receive ENL instruction per CR Part 154 and are programmed in STARS: - Entering and Emerging ENL students receive two units (360 minutes) of ESL services; 180 minutes of integrated ENL instruction and 180 minutes of stand alone instruction - Transitional ENLs are programmed in STARS to receive 180 minutes of stand alone instruction; 90 minutes of integrated instruction and 90 minutes of stand alone or 90 minutes of integrated ENL/ELA or other content area - - Expanding ENL students receive 180 minutes of integrated ENL/ELA or other content area - Commanding ENL students receive 90 minutes integrated ENL services Ms. Harrow and ENL teacher Ms. Harris review and analyze STARS and the ELL Data Update Report (EDUR) on a monthly basis to ensure ENL students are programmed for mandated ENL services. Changes, updates and adjustments are made as needed. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. To assist in making the classroom environment more conducive and comprehensible in subject areas such as mathematics, social studies, and science, teachers collectively utilize robust tactics and methodologies. Strategies to foster learning include semantic story maps and graphic organizers in order for students to dissect and organize information. Teachers encourage students to link new information to their prior knowledge, as well as to teach new vocabulary words that occur in texts. Students often work in cooperative groups to have the opportunity to discuss academic vocabulary and key concepts. Instruction and assessments are differentiated as needed. ENLs are also provided with bilingual dictionaries and content area glossaries to review unfamiliar vocabulary related to the content. Furthermore, Internet sources and technological media is provided to students as visual aids to prompt learning. Kinetic activities, the usage of manipulatives, and materials relating to particular units of study are also utilized. The ENL teacher also works cooperatively with the classroom teacher to develop appropriate techniques to deliver instruction tailored to students' needs. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? At the time students enroll in C.S. 44, the ENL students are assessed in their native language. ENLs are able to utilize translated editions of content area state exams and bilingual dictionaries and glossaries. Additionally, students have access to these accommodations throughout the school year. Students also have access to native language materials in their classroom libraries. They are encouraged to discuss content and write responses in their native language. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status To provide adequate instruction for ENL scholars, C.S. 44 uses a blended model of instruction. This blended model allows C.S. 44 the opportunity to target the specific needs of each ENL scholar, and tailor instruction for each child. Entering and Emerging ENL students to the school acquire two units (360 minutes) of ENL services of integrated (180 minutes) and stand alone (180 minutes). 2  a) SIFE students are pulled in a small group for literacy and content instruction. These students receive additional support in content area instruction (through native language materials, translated editions of content area exams, glossaries/dictionaries, and utilize technology in reading and content areas in L1). They receive intensive support from the ENL teacher and classroom teacher through oral translation, visual aids and manipulatives. Scholars are provided sentence starters, graphic organizers, and content vocabulary to aid the student to engage in conversation. Meetings with students' parents and key staff members are held throughout the school year in order to support the home-school connection. Students with Interrupted Formal Education are invited to the Title III after school program. b) Newcomers receive ENL and content area instruction (through native language materials, translated editions of content area exams, glossaries/dictionaries, and utilize technology in reading and content areas in L1). They receive intensive support from the ENL teacher and classroom teacher through oral translation, visual aids and manipulative materials. Scholars are provided sentence starters, graphic organizers, and content vocabulary to aid the student to engage in conversation. Meetings with students' parents and key staff members are held throughout the school year in order to support the home-school connection. Students are invited to the Title III after school program. c) Students who have been receiving ESL services for 4-6 years are provided extra tutoring and AIS programs tailored for their individual needs. Meetings with students' parents and key staff members are held throughout the school year in order to support the home-school connection. Students are invited to the Title III after school program. d) Long term ENL subgroup students are provided AIS services in small groups in ELA and in content area instruction. They utilize the I-Ready technology program in ELA and math to support them at their individual level. Meetings with students' parents and key staff members are held throughout the school year in order to support the home-school connection. Students are invited to the Title III after school program. e) Former ELLs who have tested commanding on the NYSESLAT are provided with additional support for two years, they receive testing modifications, including separate location, extended time, translated editions of State exams and glossaries/dictionaries. Meetings with students' parents and key staff members are held throughout the school year in order to support the home-school connection. For at least two school years following the school year in which a student is exited from English language learner (ELL) status, the student must receive a minimum of 90 minutes per week of integrated English as a new language (ENL) or other services that monitor and support the student’s language development and academic progress. (Refer to CR Part 154.) Therefore, effective fall 2018, former ELLs at CS 044 will be scheduled for one of the following options: Option A: Small-group learning Option B: Individualized targeted learning OptionC: Project-based learning Option D: A minimum of 90 minutes per week of integrated ENL 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? ENL and Students with Disabilities (SWDs) are offered equal access and use the same grade level materials and strategies as their peers in order to be provided equal access to academic content. This is achieved through programs that lend themselves to materials and strategies that are beneficial to ENL and SWD students: The Engage NY Eureka Math Program has been newly implemented for the 2017-2018 school year for kindergarten through grade 5 students. Eureka Math is aligned with the new math standards and meets the needs of ENLs and SWDs as follows: The program lends itself to differentiation opportunities for students to work individually, in partnership and small groups to discuss and share their learning. There are also digital technology resources as visuals. There is a parent component with parent resources, including parent tip sheets and homework helpers, additional features to the program. For added support to ENLs the program also includes the Spanish version of student materials and the curriculum. Additionally, in order for content to be more comprehensible to ENLs and SWDs, teachers create and post objectives students will need; content concepts as well as academic language they will need and use to fully comprehend the content. Additionally, the I-Ready technology math 3  program is used for students in K-5. Students work at their own pace, with activities, use of manipulatives, and lessons geared specifically for each student and administrators and teachers are able to monitor activity, growth and needs. Kindergarten through grade 5 students participate in the Teacher's College Reading and Writing Project (TCRWP). In conjunction with the TCRWP the ENL teacher uses various ENL strategies to support students in their language acquisition. Students are supported in small group work and conferencing feedback in reading and writing. This program also supports self assessment and reflection. The program facilitates the "close reading process" students are required to interact with text and respond to questions using textual evidence. Leveled fiction and non-fiction texts are used. The Writing Workshop is divided into units of study. With this program ENL students have sufficient time to work and receive one on one feedback. Anchor charts in students L1 are provided. All of the above features of the TCRWP are useful in assisting ENL students in their acquisition on English in the areas of listening, speaking, reading and writing. Additionally, The I-Ready reading technology program is used as a school-wide program for k-5 students. The program creates individual dashboards for students based on their specific interests and reading abilities. Teachers and administrators track student reading activity and growth. Another unique feature of the I-Ready reading and math technology program is it provides family support in English and in Spanish. Parents learn how to help their children prepare for diagnostic tests, help their children with understanding and encouraging the use of the dashboard and its tools and to discuss their childrens' results together. In science the New York City/New York State Science Scope and Sequence with hands on lessons and activities is utilized by science cluster teacher. Hands on activities offer ENLs and SWDs the opportunity to learn, while discussing and investigating with their classmates Other instructional materials used to support ENL and SWDs are laptops, Foundations/Wilson magnetic letter tiles and words, puppets, science tools, instructional games/flashcards. Dual language books in Spanish, picture books and dictionaries are available for students. The ENL teacher will support ENLs and SWDs in areas of ELA and content area using and supporting classroom and content teachers in the Stand Alone model as well as the Integrated model of the ENL program. For ENL and SWDs students to be successful they must be able to comprehend the instruction and to produce evidence of understanding. In order for this to occur teachers scaffold, differentiate, and implement a variety of strategies connected to comprehensible input, building background and encouraging student interaction. Instruction includes both content objectives and language objectives to achieve optimum comprehension focusing on the common core learning standards in conjunction with the ENL standards. ENL scholars participate in after school programs and extra curriculum activities. In addition they are invited to attend an after school Title III program, targeted specifically to ENL students where they receive additional support. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? Community School 44 uses curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to accommodate ENL-SWDs needs. Our goal is that our students achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within a reasonable amount of time. We frequently adjust our curriculum by differentiating it according to our on-going assessments and frequent progress monitoring of our ENL-SWDs. Through the careful review of each student's IEP, teachers will create Specially Designed Instruction for the students with disabilities (SWD). Intervention is also provided in short sessions with frequent opportunities to work in small groups with students of similar needs. Multi-sensory techniques are used to present information with an increase of the amount of practice opportunities. We also increase opportunities for students to respond in a variety of ways. The use of dry erase boards, thumbs-up, partner share, and graphic organizers are some of the scaffolds employed to anchor new knowledge to previously learned knowledge and concepts. Anchor charts and feedback are adapted and modified to fit the needs of scholars. 4  8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. At C.S 44 we utilize the I-Ready school-wide assessment Reading and Math Program. Data from I-Ready generates an intervention screener and places students in appropriate RTI tiers, identifying students needing remediation. The screener also provides our school with overall performance and the scope and scale of intervention each student needs. Students automatically receive online lessons featuring instruction appropriate to their specific levels and needs, based on diagnostic results. Teachers use this information in order to group students, deliver both on and off grade level lessons and reinforce student online instruction. Classroom/ENL, support and AIS teachers meet at least 2-3 times per week to: - form and instruct small group of 4-6 students based on levels and needs, with native language support as needed - conference 1:1 with students - assess ongoing growth, continued needs - plan further instruction, remediation as needed Intervention is also provided in short sessions with frequent opportunities to work in small groups with students of similar needs. Multi-sensory techniques are used to present information with an increase of the amount of practice opportunities. Use of dry erase boards, thumbs-up, partner share and graphic organizers are some of the scaffolds used to anchor new knowledge and to previously learned knowledge and concepts which students are struggling with. ENL scholars further participate in after school programs through Title I and/or Title III, targeting additional support in ENL methodology, ELA and content area instruction. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? During the current 2017-2018 school year we have implemented the Eureka Math Program. This math program has been implemented for Kindergarten through grade 5 students. Data indicates Eureka Math as a top rated math curriculum nationally, with free downloads for teachers in English and in Spanish. It includes a number of essential support resources for teachers, including professional development on line. Parents have numerous resources in order to support their children, with tip sheets and homework support help. The Program is fully aligned with the Common Core State Standards. Students use manipulatives, have real world math connections in learning math, are afforded opportunities for peer discussions and students sharing their learning. The Program lends itself to differentiation opportunities for teachers to work with ENLs and SWDs in small groups. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? Not applicable 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. ENLs are afforded equal access to all school programs both during the core school day and in after school supplementary programs. Students have access to small group instruction throughout the school day and through AIS in ELA and content area instruction. They also are provided differentiated materials to support their learning. ENLs have access to the same curricula and materials as their peers. Additionally, translated supports through the Eureka Math Program is provided. ENL students use bilingual dictionaries for translation support, teachers offer oral and written translations of texts as much as possible. Students have access to bilingual literary materials through a variety of genres. Students also use native language to respond to text and express thoughts and ideas. Teacher also scaffolds and differentiates as needed. In addition to a Title III after school program, ENL students can participate in Title I reading and math after school programs 5  beginning in mid October 2018 and continue through mid April 2019. PHIPPS is a Community Based Organization (CBO) at CS 044 which provides both academic and enrichment support to students including ELLs. These programs are held during lunch and after school. Through these supplementary programs ENL students receive enrichment in language, literacy development, test taking strategies in ELA and content areas, sports, and cultural activities. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. Instructional materials utilized in the school in order to support ENLs are; I pads, smart boards, computers, graphic organizers, anchor charts, teacher made resources, and classroom library (audio) books in the target languages. Teachers have access and utilize laptops and the technology lab for additional ELA and math instruction and intervention. - The instructional ELA program is Teacher's College Reading and Writing Program which offers student support in small group work and conferencing feedback in reading and writing. Leveled texts in a variety of genres are available for instruction and differentiation - Eureka Math is the school-wide math program for Kindergarten through grade 5 students with manipulatives, Spanish support and parent support for homework help - The I-Ready reading and math technology program is a school-wide program students utilize. Each student has an account that can be accessed in school and at home for additional benefits. The program creates individual dashboards for students based on their specific interests and reading abilities. Teachers and administrators are able to track students' reading activity and growth. This type of differentiated program is particularly beneficial to ENLs and SWDs as they are differentiated, allowing students to read and respond to text at their individual level of instruction. The program is also used as an Academic Intervention Service. - Leveled non fiction science books for grades K-1 offer simple texts with photographs covering topics on animals and nature. Science Scope and Sequence offer both hands-on and opportunities for peer work and discussion. - Leveled fiction and non-fiction books are available and provided in a variety of genres. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Home language support in our ENL program is met in various ways. It is especially needed for entering and emerging ELL students. Through the use of various media forms like books with home language and English translations, dual language dictionaries, audio/ video sources, and photographs. Additionally, ENLs have access to bilingual dictionaries and glossaries and simultaneous use of English and alternative language editions of exams are provided. Oral translators are provided for lower incidence languages when an exam is not available in students' home language. The home language support is utilized to foster healthy academic growth. In our school we also pair new students with a peer that speaks the students' home language in order to ease the transition to a new scholastic atmosphere. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. Following the initial assessments the ESL coordinator works to identify all appropriate and relevant services in order to create a schedule that corresponds to all ages and levels. Students' age, proficiency level and educational background is considered when forming groups. Groups are flexible, with change occurring to reflect student needs throughout the school year. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? N/A 6  16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). The parent coordinator orchestrates workshops, and orientations to allow parents to become familiar with school programs, expectations, and services available in and out of the school. Newly arrived students and their parents are also invited to family workshops in content areas. Parents of newly arrived ENLs take part in a mandated parent orientation and are encouraged to participate in activities and events sponsored by the parent coordinator and Parent Teacher Association of C.S. 44 throughout the school year. The events are supported to accommodate parents' home language. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? None applicable. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? Not applicable. Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? The ESL professional development plan for the staff at C.S. 44 is as follows: Professional development is conducted for all staff at CS 44, including administrators, teachers of ENLs, related service providers and non-pedagogic staff. Additionally, the parent coordinator and secretary attend staff conferences and regional professional development in order to specifically address language interpretation needs and compliance information as it relates to parents' and students' needs. In order for ENLs to receive quality instruction, on-going professional development is an essential catalyst for providing all staff with effective and proven strategies, methodology and activities. Fifteen percent of the professional development hours for all teachers is dedicated to language acquisition. This includes a focus on best practices for co-teaching strategies and integrating language and content instruction for ENLs. Additionally, for ENL teachers a minimum of 50% of professional development hours will be dedicated to language acquisition in alignment with core content area instruction, including a focus on best practices for co-teaching strategies and integrating language and content instruction for ENLs. Collectively as a school we have been striving to build our students' academic vocabulary. Our students start off in the zone of proximal development and are supported until they can achieve academic independence. We also provide teachers with workshops that teach close reading strategies and word attack skills. Close reading is used as a device to develop student vocabulary and access to complex text. Providing ENLs with tools needed to develop close reading skills is an important step in helping them access more challenging grade level texts. Professional development in supporting these tools to ENLs is beneficial to the entire school community. 7  2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. Our school provides professional development cycles around ENL students in order to provide teachers with a better understanding of language acquisition and instructional strategies, in which teachers can use to support ENLs. During the 2018-2019 school year 15% of total hours of professional development will occur in order to meet CR Part 80 regulations (with dates to be announced). This will include professional development on the topic of language acquisition. Focus will also be on the use of translations and interpretations services available to school staff and parents. Best practices strategies and methodology professional development opportunities will be discussed. Throughout the 2018-2019 school year the ENL coordinator/teacher, content area teachers and classroom teachers will attend professional development workshops in the area of ESL methodology, accelerating vocabulary development and academic language acquisition through the Office of English Language Learners. Participating teachers will turn-key elements of the sessions with school staff members. Agendas including dates, time and topics are distributed and kept on file. Sign-in sheets are kept as records of professional development attendees. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? At least one individual meeting with each parent of ENL students at CS 44 will be arranged. Parents will be scheduled during Tuesdays, parental involvement time or a meeting will be arranged at parents' preferred and convenient time. During this time information and goals specific to their child's language development will be discussed. English language proficiency assessment results will be discussed, as well as language development needs in content areas. The meeting incorporates school staff that is necessary and able to inform the parents or guardians about the child's development in the content areas. The meeting is orchestrated with a qualified interpreter/translator in the language or mode of communication the parent or guardian best understands. Parents sign-in on attendance sheet and records kept on file. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. ENL parental involvement is very common in our school. Parents of ENL's are active on our School Leadership Team, volunteer during lunch periods, and are immersed in our schools PTA, and book fairs. Family workshops during the 2018-2019 will be offered in reading and content areas of math and science. Workshops will assist and support parents by providing them the necessary tools and strategies to support their childrens' academic success. Within each workshop, parents learn effective reading and math strategies as they and their children experience hands on learning situations. Parents are also provided with activities to practice with at home with their children. Agendas including dates, time and topic of workshops are distributed and copies kept on file. Sign-in sheets are kept as records of parents' attendance. 8  During workshops translators/interpreters in the language or mode of communication parents best understand are available or accessed through the Translation & Interpretation Unit. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Paste response here: 9 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Melissa Harrow, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 0  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: David C. Farragut School DBN: 12X044 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Melissa Harrow Title Principal Cheryl Hall Assistant Principal Aritza Verdejo Parent Coordinator Irena Harris ENL/Bilingual Teacher NA Parent Kelly Garzione Teacher/Subject Area Rosanna Palumbo Teacher/Subject Area Gloria Ford Anderson Althea Redwood Coach Coach Lauren Fotinos School Counselor Rafaela Espinal Kristy DeLaCruz NA NA NA Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member ELL Office Other NA Other NA Other NA Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 06/22/18 06/22/18 06/22/18 06/22/18 06/22/18 06/22/18 06/22/18 06/22/18 06/22/18 06/22/18 06/22/18 06/22/18 NA NA NA 1  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 12x044 School Name: David C. Farragut Superintendent: Rafaela Espinal The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Aritza Verdejo Parent Coordinator YES Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. At Community School 44 we utilize the data provided by parents to assess the language preferences in which are most suitable for them. On the Home Language Identification Survey questions such as, " In what language would you like to receive written or oral information from the school?" help educators gain a clear understanding of what language is best in order to communicate meaningfully, and efficiently. On Student Emergency Cards there is also a section where parents are asked "What is the parent/guardians preferred language of communication?" Home language preference is also culled from student emergency cards and C.S. 44 surveys. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. 2  Bengali French Mandinka Malinke English Spanish Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral 2 2 1 1 186 84 0.72 0.72 0.36 0.36 3 3 1 1 67.39 186 30.43 83 0.72 1.09 0.36 0.36 67.39 30.07 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. N/A Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to Families How do you plan to translate? Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. CS 044 serves a substantial Spanish speaking population therefore written communications are translated into Spanish. Documents are translated into Spanish by Parent Coordinator, Aritza Verdejo, School Secretary, Janet Hernandez, and other Spanish speaking staff. General memorandums and communications Yearlong For parents of lower incidence languages, a notice in their home language is attached to the English document stating, “For translation in your home language please contact Ms. Verdejo, Parent Coordinator." 3  Emergency Forms, Registration Packet, Particularly in September during registration and on-going throughout school year Newsletters Monthly School Calendars monthly basis Parent Teacher Conference/ Open School Nights September 17, 2018 November 29, 2018 March 13, 2019 May 16, 2019 When required, written translations will be provided through the Translation and Interpretation Unit. Attachment A of Chancellor's Regulation A-663, "Important Notice for Parents Regarding Language Assistance Services" is posted on our school's information board in the school lobby entrance in numerous languages in order for parents to be assisted and advised by the school on how to avail themselves of translation services provided by Community School 44. Every attempt is made by Community School 44 to provide parents with translations in their preferred language. Written translations are provided in Spanish by Parent Coordinator, Aritza Verdejo and School Secretary, Janet Hernandez, and other Spanish speaking staff. For lower incidence languages the Language and Interpretation Unit is used. Bilingual (English/Spanish) newsletters are sent to parents. Parents with low incidence home language can contact the school to receive a translation in the preferred language. Bilingual (English/Spanish) calendars are sent to parents. Parents with low incidence home language can contact the school to receive a translation in the preferred language. Bilingual (English/Spanish) documents are sent to parents. Parents with low incidence home language can contact the school to receive a translation in the preferred language. In October 2018 we will submit our documents for translation to the Translation and Interpretation Unit, then disseminate to parents a week prior to each event. 4  Testing Memos Year long Parent Workshop information Year long General Announcement/ Year long Memos Bilingual (English/Spanish) documents are sent to parents. Parents with low incidence home language can contact the school to receive a translation in the preferred language. Bilingual (English/Spanish) documents are sent to parents. Parents with low incidence home language can contact the school to receive a translation in the preferred language. Bilingual (English/Spanish) documents are sent to parents. Parents with low incidence home language can contact the school to receive a translation in the preferred language. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide Parent-Teacher Conferences September 13, 2018 November 29, 2018 March 13, 2019 May 16, 2019 Tuesdays Parental Involvement between 2:35 and 3:15 Weekly Tuesdays Parent-Teacher Association Meetings Monthly Parent Workshops in Literacy, Math and other Content Areas Throughout school year. interpretation service(s)? Teachers proficient in Spanish and French can accommodate parents in the preferred language. Language Line Solutions is a 24/7 resources that can be used for instant communication in over 200 languages. Staff members utilize the interpretation services offered by Language Line Solution to communicate with parents in their respective home languages. Teachers proficient in Spanish and French can accommodate parents in the preferred language. Staff members utilize the interpretation services offered by Language Line Solution to communicate with parents in their respective home languages. CS 044 Parent Coordinator, Ms. Verdejo provides translations in Spanish and can utilize Language Line Solutions as needed. Teachers proficient in Spanish and French can accommodate parents in the preferred language. Staff members utilize the interpretation services offered by Language Line Solution to 5  communicate with parents in their respective home languages. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. Blackboard is a mass communication tool used by CS 044 to communicate with parents. Blackboard is linked to the parents’ preferred language information in ATS. The Parent Coordinator, Ms. Verdejo, translates important notifications and emergency information then sends them to parents through the automated voice system in Blackboard. Language Line Solutions is a 24/7 resources that can be used for instant communication in over 200 languages. CS 044 uses this system for emergency one on one calls or meetings with parents as well as for parent teacher conferences. This ensures that all parents’ language preferences are adhered to. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. At the beginning of a new school year, and throughout the school year, Community School 44 staff receive professional development training in the procedures and requirements for translation and interpretation services, as per Section VII of Chancellor's Regulation A-663. Staff is informed of our obligation to provide oral and written language assistance services to all parents who require language assistance in order to communicate effectively with school staff regarding their child. We address the importance of timely provision of both written documents and oral communication services which must be provided either through in-school resources or through resources provided by the Translation and Interpretation Unit. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) Once the primary language of the student is determined, the school maintains appropriate and current records for the purpose of communicating with parents. This information is maintained in ATS and on student emergency cards. Parents are provided with a copy of "Bill of Parent Rights and Responsibilities", which includes their rights regarding 6  translation and interpretation services. This guide will be provided in the parent's language preference. Community School 44 also posts information indicating translation services on the parents' bulletin board and in other visible locations in the school. Multilingual welcome signs are also posted and the language id guide is always located at the security desk and main office. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? Our school will use verbal feedback as well as surveys in order to gather the best feedback from parents. At C.S 44 we strongly believe that feedback is always necessary for improvement. 7 
