 10X051 School Name: P.S. 051 BRONX NEW SCHOOL Principal: MIN HONG 2018-19 CEP-CS 1  Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC)   Section 1: School Information Page School Information School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: The Bronx New School 10X051 321000010051 PreK-5 School Number (DBN): 695 East 182 nd Street, Bronx, NY 10457 718-733-0347 718-733-5142 Phone Number: Fax: Helen Smith HSmith19@schools.nyc.gov Email Address: School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Min Hong Helen Smith AlairaAshford Linda Chiu Jamie Freeman NA NA CharityReeves District Information Geographical District: 10 Superintendent’s Office Address: Maribel Hulla Superintendent: 1 Fordham Plaza, Room 836, Bronx, NY 10458 MHulla@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718-741-5852 Phone Number: 718-741-7098 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC)   FSC: Bronx Executive Director’s Office Address: Jose Ruiz Executive Director: 1 FordhamPlaza, Bronx, New York 10458 jruiz2@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 718-828-7776 Phone Number: 718-828-6280 Fax:   Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Min Hong Helen Smith AlairaAshford Jamie Freeman CharityReeves Linda Chiu LesteeneGarrett Marsha Jarrell *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/ SLT Chair Member/ Teacher Member/ Teacher   Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Yesenia Aviles-Saleh Methantha Williams Carmen Cruz MaribelCabrera Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/   Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with   the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement   Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? The Bronx New School's mission is to ensure and promote every child's academic success and social emotional well-being by empowering and engaging all members of the school community to champion for all our children.   2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. Founded in 1988 by parents and teachers, the Bronx New School has long been a School of Choice for District 10 families who are drawn to its close, tightly-knit community and emphasis on rigorous instruction and the arts. Approximately 40% of the student population resides outside of the immediate school neighborhood. With approximately 200 students and only 1-2 classes per grade, students not only become close with grade-level peers but also with those throughout the school. The school's belief in educating the whole child is reflected in its diverse arts and STEM offerings. Recently designated as a NYCDOE Community School, the Bronx New School offers a vibrant after-school program with sports, drama, arts, and STEM activities. School-wide initiatives and events create multiple opportunities for students to engage in learning together, including:  Long-standing partnerships with arts organizations such as The DreamYard Project, National Dance Institute, and Education Through Music  Growing partnerships with Curious-on-Hudson, an organization offering STEAM enrichment programs; SYTA Youth Foundation, an organization supporting travel and cultural learning opportunities; and Bronx Green-Up, the New York Botanical Garden's community gardening program Family engagement events such as our annual Unity Celebration; NDI Dance Performance; College and Career Readiness Evening; and Fine Arts Night  Students are given opportunities to demonstrate or be recognized for leadership skills and learning accomplishments with initiatives such as: Student of the Month STEM Matters NYC Science Expo  The 4th Grade Student Ambassadors program    DreamYard Arts Festival and Makers Jam at Lehman College  Bronx New School STEM Share Fair Teachers and staff collaborate in a positive environment to support the academic and social-emotional needs of all students. Using an inquiry approach, teacher teams plan and analyze student work to thoughtfully plan next steps in learning for each student. As a professional learning community, administration and teachers conduct learning walks and peer classroom inter-visitations to grow their knowledge of pedagogical practices and reflect upon the effectiveness of instruction. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. English Language Learners There are 8 English Language Learners in the school (4% of total student population). ELL students receive services ranging from push-in to pull-out instruction based on English proficiency levels. Instruction is further differentiated within ELA units of study to target the needs of ELLs. Students with Special Needs There are 30 Students with Special Needs (14% of total student population). 50% of these students receive Related Services (speech/occupational/physical therapy) only. The remaining 50% spend less than 20% of the week receiving Special Education classroom services. 0  4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. Most Progress in Past Year With respect to the Framework for Great Schools, the school made the most progress in creating a Supportive Environment. The school met its SY 17-18 goal of decreasing the number of students with excessive lateness by 15% due to ongoing communications and targeted outreach to families and as evidenced by ATS data. Moreover, additional Supportive Environment initiatives related to social-emotional learning were implemented to promote positive academic and personal behaviors, which will continue to be strengthened in the new year. Key Areas of Focus After reviewing reading proficiency levels based on end-of-year assessments, the school has selected the area of Rigorous Instruction as a key area of focus. The school will work towards increasing reading proficiency levels of all students, as evidenced with Fountas and Pinnell assessments. The Framework element of Collaborative Teachers will be another area of focus. Per NYC School Survey data, teachers expressed a desire for more input in the selection and development of instructional materials. Collective knowledge on the range of complexity within texts will be developed to guide teachers in enhancing classroom libraries and the selection of engaging mentor texts for units of study. Common planning time will be structured to promote collaboration in the planning of units and lesson plans. 1  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 10X051 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 0K,01,02,03,04,05 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 217 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient N/A N/A 10 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 21 18 10 10 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 89.0% % Attendance Rate 84.3% % Reduced Lunch 3.7% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.9% 59.4% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 2.3% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 3.26 0% 31% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 28.2% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 78% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A YES N/A N/A YES Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A YES N/A N/A NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A YES N/A N/A YES High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 5 5 10 92.6% 5.1% 15.2% 35.5% 1.8% 0.9% 2 0% 8.6 35.9% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No YES N/A N/A N/A YES YES N/A N/A N/A NO N/A N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 1. Strengths: Data from the Quality Review for the 2017-2018 school year indicated that the school employs high-quality assessment practices in the form of teacher, self-, and peer-assessments to generate an understanding of student mastery. This results in flexible groupings to meet all students' needs, with teaching practices adjusted in response to current assessment data. Students state being aware of next steps to move to the next level or obtain mastery at their current levels. 2. Priority Needs: In the focus area of Rigorous Instruction, instructional leaders analyzed New York State ELA test data from recent years and noticed gaps in the proficiency levels between NYS ELA tests and endline reading assessment data based on Fountas & Pinnell Reading Benchmarks. Grades 3-5 ELA Data Level 3 and 4 2 1 Level 3 and 4 2 1 Level 3 and 4 2 1 P.S. 51X – Bronx New School 2014 – 2015 2015 – 2016 2016 – 2017 2017-2018 26% 39% 36% 32% 39% 29% Third Grade 24% 48% 28% 28% 38% 33% 2014 – 2015 2015 – 2016 2016 – 2017 2017-2018 29% 45% 26% 25% 36% 39% Fourth Grade 27% 36% 36% 41% 38% 21% 2014 – 2015 2015 – 2016 2016 – 2017 2017-2018 35% 32% 32% 36% 58% 6% 17% 62% 21% 20% 45% 35% 3 Fifth Grade Level 3 and 4 2 1 2014 – 2015 2015 – 2016 2016 – 2017 2017-2018 15% 38% 46% 36% 21% 43% 28% 43% 29% 17% 33% 50% Fountas & Pinnell Benchmark Reading Assessment Data - May 2018 P.S. 51X – Bronx New School Grade Levels 3 and 4 Level 2 Level 1 5 4 3 2 1 K Total 36% 54% 38% 29% 40% 29% 37% 4% 0% 8% 3% 9% 9% 6% 60% 46% 54% 68% 51% 62% 57% Fountas & Pinnell Benchmark Reading Assessment Data – December 2017 P.S. 51X – Bronx New School Grade Levels 3 and 4 Level 2 Level 1 5 4 3 2 1 K Total 35% 54% 36% 34% 54% 18% 38% Part 2 – Annual Goal 4% 0% 14% 13% 3% 13% 9% 62% 46% 50% 53% 43% 68% 54% Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. 4  By June 2019, the number of students reading at or above a proficient level will increase by at least 5% (from 37% to 42%) as evidenced by Fountas & Pinnell reading assessments. In addition, the number of students at a Level 1 proficiency level will decrease by at least 5% (from 57% to 52%), as evidenced by Fountas & Pinnell reading assessments. 5  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Conduct additional training for the administration of Fountas & Pinnell Benchmark Assessments (observations, running records, and scoring conventions) Pedagogues Sept 2018 Administration Professional Learning Team Provide three 6-week cycles of professional development in the collection, analysis, and use of formative data for the differentiation of reading instruction, including instruction targeted towards ENL and SWD subgroups Conduct five learning walks and/or peer inter-visitations to strengthen pedagogical knowledge of instructional differentiation practices targeted towards at-risk learners, SWD and ENL students, focusing on guided reading, shared reading, strategy groups, and accountable talk Pedagogues Oct 2018 Administration Jan 2019 Mar 2019 Professional Learning Team Pedagogues Oct 2018 Administration Professional Learning Team Nov 2018 Jan 2019 Mar 2019 Apr 2019 Administer Fountas & Pinnell formative assessments in reading four times per year Students Sept 2018 Pedagogues Facilitate teacher teams to meet after each benchmark assessment to analyze data (including SWD and ENL subgroups), identify trends and patterns, form flexible student groups for instruction, and plan next steps. Dec 2018 Administration Feb 2019 May 2019 Pedagogues Oct 2018 Administration Jan 2019 Mar 2019 Professional Learning Team 6 Facilitate weekly grade team meetings to support the planning of reading instruction that meets the needs of all student subgroups, including SWD and ENL students. Pedagogues Sept 2018-June 2019 Implement ELA monthly units of study based on Teachers College, EngageNY and balanced literacy practices, with an emphasis on differentiated small-group instruction, individual conferring, and coordinated support with AIS and SETTS teachers Students Sept 2018-June 2019 Administration Professional Learning Team Pedagogues Administration 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Facilitate monthly workshops during Parent Engagement time to inform families about:  Common Core Learning Standards in English Language Arts (ELA)  New York State ELA Testing in Grades 3-5  End-of-year grade level expectations in reading behaviors and comprehension  ELA curriculum overview  Resources (e.g. RazKids, iReady, etc.) and literacy activities that families can access and implement to support learning at home Workshops will begin in September 2018 with Curriculum Night and continue throughout the year. Classroom newsletters and webpages will be used to communicate current information on instructional content and goals. Parent-teacher conferences will provide additional opportunities to keep families informed of individual student progress. ULit coaches and teachers will be responsible for implementation. Administration will provide oversight and additional support. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Human Resources: Teacher Teams; Cluster, SETTS and AIS Teachers; After-School Teachers; ULit Coach; School-Based Support Team; Professional Learning Team; Administration Instructional Resources: professional development resources; research-based materials, including Fountas & Pinnell resources Scheduling: Weekly professional learning and parent engagement sessions; grade team common planning time; AIS and SETTS programming; on- and off-site professional development opportunities when available; after-school arts, enrichment and AIS programming; Saturday Academy for Grades 3-5 Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other 7  Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By January 2019, at least 46% of all K-5 students will be at Level 2 proficiency level or above, as evidenced by Fountas & PInnell benchmark reading assessments. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) Data from the Fountas & Pinnell Benchmark Assessments administered in December 2018 will be the leading indicator used to modify instruction to achieve the annual goals. Attendance sheets, meeting agendas and minutes from professional development sessions, as well as informal running records will be used to supplement the leading indicator. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 8  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? 1. Strengths: According to the 2017-2018 NYC Schools Survey, 100% of teachers indicated that students were safe in all areas of the school. 92% of these teachers strongly felt that adults help students to develop the skills needed to complete challenging coursework despite obstacles. Overall, individual measures on this framework element show positive trends. Data from recent NYC School Surveys as follows: 2015- 2016- 2017- Framework Element: Supportive Environment Classroom Behavior Peer Support for Academic Work Safety Social-Emotional 2016 78% 84% 85% 86% 2017 80% 89% 91% 96% 2018 82% 88% 93% 83% The school achieved a well-developed rating in its ability to establish a learning culture of high expectations on the 2017-2018 Quality Review. The consistent communication of high expectations positively impacted student ownership of their learning. During the 2017-2018 academic year, the school community aligned itself with the district to ensure social-emotional learning is implemented to better understand and serve the needs of our students. School leaders were engaged in professional learning in this area in order to make instructional decisions that would best support the social and emotional needs of all students. 2. Priority Needs: According to the 2017-2018 Quality Review, the school was rated as proficient in its ability to maintain a culture of mutual trust and positive attitudes to support the academic and personal growth of students. This area was further designated as an area of focus for future improvement. While multiple structures are in place to provide academic and social-emotional support, the school will focus on the continuity of consistent SEL implementation to promote positive academic and social behaviors. The implementation of SEL programs was new in 2017-2018 and required teachers and students to learn new routines and protocols. This may have been a contributing factor to the slight decrease in the area of social-emotional learning, since programs must be given adequate time to build program fidelity in order to accurately assess effectiveness. 9  Although there was an increase in OORS incidents for SY 17-18, this was expected due to tighter reporting protocols. The school will use the SY17-18 data point as a more accurate baseline indicator to monitor progress towards reducing the number of OORS incidences in SY 18-19. OORS Incident Data – 2017-2018 as of 6/1/2018 Year 2017-2018 2016-2017 2015-2016 Total Incidents 26 9 15 3. Policies, Practices and Structures: During the 2017-2018 academic year, the school began to implement weekly community circles to build cohesive classroom community and provide additional opportunities for students to engage in thoughtful discussion about social situations and peer relationships. A Positive Behavior Interventions and Support (PBIS) system and an Emotions Do Matter Board were two initiatives that were launched to recognize positive academic and social-emotional behaviors. In partnership with the parent coordinator, a Respect for All curriculum was also implemented to highlight the value of kindness and inclusiveness. The Ambassadors and Students of the Month programs continue to provide youth leadership opportunities and school-wide recognition of students' individual accomplishments. The Book of the Month program has highlighted SEL to further support classroom discussion of important themes related to emotional expression and regulation as well as positive peer relationships. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, the number of student incidents will decrease by 10% as evidenced by OORS data. 0  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Conduct professional development on social-emotional learning, specifically targeting peer relationships, social situations, emotional regulation and de-escalation strategies Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Pedagogues Oct 2018- Administration Collaborate with students in the creation and implementation of school-wide and classroom-level charters based on Yale's RULER approach Students Implement instruction for students regarding safe behavior in non-classroom areas such as school buses, cafeteria, bathrooms, and gymnasium. Continue previously-launched SEL practices to encourage positive academic and social behaviors, including community circles, PBIS, Emotions Do Matter Board, Students of the Month, Student Ambassadors, and Book of the Month program Students Students Sept 2018- Pedagogues Dec 2018 Sept 2018- Nov 2018 Pedagogues Administration Nov 2018 Sept 2018-June 2019 Pedagogues Administration Offer after-school arts, sports and AIS activities that highlight SEL themes and promote positive academic and personal behaviors Students Oct 2018- Pedagogues Conduct parent workshops on positive behavior strategies, health, and other wellness themes to support academic achievement June 2019 Administration Parents Oct 2018 Pedagogues Nov 2018 Guidance Counselor Jan 2019 Administration 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Parents will be informed of student behavior expectations and social-emotional needs at the beginning of the school year during Cuuriculum Night. Families will be made aware of the school's PBIS system and Student of the Month programs so they can support their children's academic and personal behaviors at home. In September, the school will support learning with Dads Take Your Child to School Day. This event for fathers and other significant male figures will honor the significant role they play in our students' lives. A parent workshop will be offered in October on positive behavior strategies for children. A nutrition series sponsored by Cornell University will 1  be offered from October thru December, focusing on healthy eating habits and how they can impact academic and social behaviors. In June, an "open house" will be offered to parents with children in our growing after-school program to highlight student activities and provide additional resources to strengthen the home-school connection. Key personnel who will be responsible for implementation and oversight include teachers, parent coordinator, the after-school director, and administration. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Human Resources: Administration; Parent Coordinator; Pedagogues; Guidance Counselor; After-School Director Instructional Resources: Yale's RULER curriculum; restorative practices; additional evidence-based practices targeting specific domains of social-emotional learning Scheduling: Weekly parent engagement sessions will provide time for parent workshops and outreach; professional development time will be allocated for staff to build SEL knowledge and practice; school-wide schedules will reflect weekly time dedicated to community circles Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, 100% of staff will have engaged in professional development in social-emotional learning resulting in a 5% decrease in student incidents as evidenced by OORS data. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. OORS data; staff survey on professional development Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 1. Strengths: In recent NYC School Surveys, teachers positively rated the school's level of cultural awareness and inclusive classroom instruction. Positive data trends related to this Framework element are as follows: 2015- 2016- 2017- Framework Element: Collaborative Teachers Cultural Awareness and Inclusive Classroom Instruction Quality of Professional Development School Commitment Peer Collaboration 2016 2017 2018 94% 56% 72% 80% 83% 68% 79% 96% 95% 73% 85% 93% The 2017-2018 Quality Review also found the majority of teachers engaged in structured, inquiry-based professional collaborations to promote the achievement of school goals. This teacher collaboration strengthened instructional capacity and positively impacted student performance. 2. Priority Needs: Although teacher perceptions in the NYC School Survey of the quality of professional development show positive data trends overall, there is a need for the school to structure time for teachers to reflect upon their practice as well as try and evaluate new ideas in order to impact student achievement. Data trends for quality of professional development, as measured by the NYC School Survey, are as follows: Framework Element: Collaborative Teachers Quality of Professional Development as measured by NYC School Survey Sustained, coherently focused professional development Time to think carefully about, try, and evaluate new ideas 2015-2016 2016-2017 2017-2018 56% 91% 85% 63% 82% 69% 3  Opportunities to work productively with colleagues in their school Part 2 – Annual Goal 75% 82% 100% Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, the score related to time for trying out and evaluating new ideas will increase by 5% as evidenced by teacher responses in the NYC School Survey. 4  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Facilitate weekly grade team meetings with a focus on planning, analysis of student work, and differentiated instruction, with a focus on ENL students and SWD subgroups Pedagogues Sept 2018-June 2019 Administration Professional Learning Team Conduct weekly coaching sessions to allow teachers the opportunity to observe and implement new ideas in ELA instruction, with a focus on instructional differentiation and balanced literacy practices Administer periodic reading and writing assessments to analyze student work, and reflect upon/evaluate the effectiveness of new ideas implemented in units of study Pedagogues Sept 2018- Administration May 2019 Professional Learning Team Students Sept 2018 Pedagogues Dec 2018 Administration Jan 2019 Feb 2019 May 2019 Elicit periodic feedback and reflections from teachers on the impact of professional development and coaching sessions. Pedagogues Dec 2019 Administration Mar 2019 May 2019 Professional Learning Team 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Through parent workshops and home-school communications, teachers and administration will inform families about the school's goals related to English Language Arts and the value of teacher collaboration to promote success in this endeavor. 5  Workshops will begin in September 2018 with Curriculum Night and continue throughout the year. Classroom newsletters and webpages will be used to communicate current information on instructional content and goals. Parent-teacher conferences will provide additional opportunities to keep families informed of individual student progress. ULit coaches and teachers will be responsible for implementation. Administration will provide oversight and additional support. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Human Resources: Pedagogues; Administration; Professional Learning Team; Pedagogues; ULit coach; substitute coverage as needed Instructional Resources: Professional learning resources, classroom instructional materials Schedule Adjustments: Weekly Professional Learning sessions; common planning periods; per session as needed Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By January 2019, the school will have a 3% increase in scores related to teachers' perceptions of having the time to carefully think, try out and evaluate new ideas in teaching practices, as evidenced by a teacher survey. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Teacher meeting agendas, attendance and minutes; writing unit revisions Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 6  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 1. Strengths: Data trends on the NYC School Survey related to the Framework element of Effective School Leadership generally show year-over-year increases. In the most recent survey, teachers highly rated the school's instructional leadership (95%), inclusive leadership (94%) and program coherence (93%), all three of which were at or above district and city averages. Framework Element: Effective School Leadership as measured by NYC School Survey Inclusive Leadership Instructional Leadership Program Coherence Teacher Influence 2. Priority Needs: 2015- 2016- 2017- 2016 94% 77% 64% 66% 2017 95% 81% 82% 69% 2018 94% 95% 93% 85% Based on the NYC School Survey, Teacher influence scored at a level of 85% overall. Scores for teacher influence over the selection and development of instructional materials were at 77%. This data point represents a desire from teachers to have greater influence over decision-making related to instructional materials. Framework Element: Effective School Leadership Individual Measure: Teacher Influence as measured by NYC School Survey Principal encourages feedback through regular meetings with parent and teacher leaders Teachers have influence over selection of instructional materials Teachers have influence over the development of instructional materials 2015- 2016- 2017- 2016 2017 2018 81% 82% 100% 50% 55% 77% 63% 64% 77% 7  Teachers have influence over standards for student behavior Part 2 – Annual Goal 69% 73% 85% Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, school leadership will provide monthly common planning time for teachers to specifically focus on the selection and development of instructional materials, including ELA unit plans, resulting in a 5% increase in overall Teacher Influence score, as evidenced by the NYC School Survey. 8  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Allocate time during grade team meetings prior to monthly ELA unit launches to assess the quality and availability of instructional materials, e.g. teaching resources, mentor texts and student texts Pedagogues Sept 2018-May 2019 Structure the schedule for grade team planning time, allocating monthly time for the revision and development of ELA curriculum units and accompanying instructional materials Pedagogues Sept 2018-May 2019 Create a guided reading book room with a range of new titles to provide greater choices for instructional materials Pedagogues Sept 2018 Administration Professional Learning Team Administration Professional Learning Team Professional Learning Team Conduct a mid-year teacher survey to elicit feedback on the quality of guided reading and book club titles, and request lists of desired titles from teachers for future purchase. Pedagogues Dec 2018 Administration Professional Learning Team 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Parents will be informed about City-Wide and school-wide behavior expectations at the beginning of the school year during Curriculum Night. Families will be informed via monthly class newsletters and periodic class webpage updates of ELA units of study, including instructional materials and resources recommended by teachers. Administration will be key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Human Resources: Administration; pedagogues; substitute coverage as needed 9  Instructional Resources: Teacher per session and common planning time; professional development books/resources and classroom instructional materials Scheduling: Weekly PL sessions; per session as needed Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Tax Levy C4E X X Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, teacher influence over the selection and development of instructional materials will have increased 3%, as evidenced by a survey administered to teachers. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. A mid-year teacher survey will be administered as the primary instrument of measuring progress towards increasing teacher influence over instructional materials. Teacher meeting agendas, attendance and minutes will supplement this data. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 0  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 1. Strengths Year-over-year data from the NYC School Survey indicates a positive upward trend in the area of outreach to parents. Teachers consistently offer parent engagement workshops and frequent home-school communication via class newsletters and webpages. Framework Element: Strong Family-Community Ties as measured by NYC School Survey Outreach to Parents 2. Priority Needs: 2015- 2016- 2017- 2016 91% 2017 93% 2018 96% In the 2017-2018 NYC School Survey, parents indicate having fewer opportunities to volunteer time to support the school. Although the school has always welcomed parent volunteers, the school community recognizes the need to establish more formal opportunities for parents to engage in volunteer efforts within the school. Framework Element: Strong Family-Community Ties Individual Measure: Parent Involvement in School as measured by NYC School Survey Families have had the opportunity to volunteer time to support the school. Part 2 – Annual Goal 2015- 2016- 2017- 2016 2017 2018 79% 75% 68% Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. 1  By June 2019, two opportunities will be offered for parents to volunteer time to support school-wide events, resulting in strengthened family-community ties as measured by a 5% increase in parent involvement scores on the NYC School Survey. 2  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Discuss potential opportunities for parent volunteerism during monthly SLT meetings, in coordination with the Parent Coordinator and PTA. SLT PTA Sept 2018-Nov 2018 Administration Pedagogues Parent Coordinator Administer a parent survey to determine their specific interests in volunteer opportunities within the school Families Nov 2018 Parent Coordinator Identify 2-3 formal parent volunteering initiatives and inform families to gauge the level of potential interest from the school community. Form committees to support oversight, communication and implementation of parent volunteering initiatives. SLT/PTA Dec 2018 Administration Administration Families Jan 2019 Administration Parent Coordinator SLT/PTA Parent Committees Parent Coordinator Provide training as needed for parent volunteer opportunities. Families Feb 2019 Administration Provide bi-monthly opportunities for parent committees to gather and plan school-wide events and/or initiatives Families Mar 2019-June 2019 Implement parent volunteer initiatives and provide post-event or initiative opportunities for parent committees to reflect on quality of planning, communication and family engagement. Families Mar 2019-June 2019 Parent Coordinator Administration Parent Committees Parent Coordinator Administration Parent Committees Parent Coordinator 3  3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. The School Leadership Program; DreamYard; Legacy Sports; Education Through Music; National Dance Institute; Curious-on-Hudson Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Human Resources: Administration; Parent Coordinator; School Leadership Team; Parent-Teacher Association; Staff Additional Resources: Partnerships with The School Leadership Program; Legacy Sports; Dream Yard, Education Through Music, National Dance Institute and Curious-on-Hudson; media and other communications Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E X X Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By January 2019, at least 71% of families will have responded as having had at least one opportunity to volunteer time at the school, based on a family survey. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. A parent survey will be the primary instrument of measure indicating level of progress towards meeting the annual goal, Meeting agendas, attendance and minutes and home-school communications regarding volunteer opportunities will supplement this data point. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 4  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) Small group When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) All services are provided during the school dayand after school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Grades3-5 students performing below the median scale score between a Level 2/Partially Proficient and a Level 3/Proficient score on the NYS ELAtest, and additional multiple measures of student performance, including: - Fountas& PinnellBenchmark Reading Assessments Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) ReadyGen:an integrated literacy program with authentic literary and informational texts guided by modeling and teacher-directed activities Fundations:Research-based, systematic program in critical reading foundation skills - CCLS-Aligned Benchmark Assessments Guided Reading - Common writing assessments Grades 1-2 students scoring at Levels1 and 2 based on - Fountas & PinnellBenchmark Reading Assessments - Common writing assessments Interactive Writing Content-Related Vocabulary Instruction 5  Mathematics Science Grades3-5 students performing below the median scale score between a Level 2/Partially Proficient and a Level 3/Proficient score on the NYSMathematics Test, and additional multiple measures of student performance, including: -CCLS-Aligned Benchmark Assessments - NYCMath Performance Task Assessments - Unit formative and summativeassessments - Unit performance tasks Unit formative and summative classroom assessments Social Studies Unit formative and summative classroom assessments At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Anecdotal records; RTIreferrals; Special education referrals; IEPs; incident reports; Small Groups All services are provided during the school day and after school. Go Math!: CCLS-aligned program focusingon mathematical thinking and fluency Flexibleguided math and strategy groups Small Groups All services are provided during the school day Small Groups All services are provided during the school day Small group and/or one-to-one, based on need All services are provided during the school day HMHScience Dimensions:Activity-driven lessons paired with informational texts and media/digital tools Integration of social studies content with additional information texts, primary and secondary visual and print sources Depending on student need, programs/strategies may include conflict resolution; emotional regulation activities; peer/adult relationship-building strategies; 6  attendance records communication skills; executive functioning skills 7  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 18 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. STH students will be provided with a backpack containing grade-specific books, school materials, instructional games, and emergency supplies, such as needed clothing and crib sheets. At-risk counseling services and Academic Intervention Services will be provided as needed. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). NONE 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 8  NONE 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. N/A 9  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. The school focuses on continuous, personalized teacher growth within a small, tightly-knit professional learning community, all of which helps to attract and retain highly-qualified teachers (HQT). Administrative staff regularly attend hiring fairs and have collaborative relationships with local colleges and universities to recruit highly-qualified teachers. Teacher candidates undergo a rigorous interview process that includes a demo lesson. Administration assigns teachers to engage in professional development opportunities at the borough field support center. The school's partnership with the New Teacher Center supports new teachers by providing a highly-trained mentor who provides ongoing support throughout the year. School-based mentors and coaches are also provided to support new teachers. The pupil personnel secretary works closely to ensure that non HQT meet all required documentation and assessment deadlines. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). Professional development will be provided for teachers every Monday afternoon during the 2018-2019 school year. Topics will be determined by current student needs, school-wide goals, and teacher needs/interests as they relate to meeting Common Core State Standards (CCSS). Multiple opportunities for cross-grade collaborative learning will be available to collectively build pedagogical knowledge of ELA and math instructional practices. Teachers and the Professional Learning Team will analyze 2018 NYS ELA and Mathematics Test data and other formative and summative data sources to help determine professional development needs. Administrators engage in informal and formal observation protocols to provide ongoing feedback and support, as well as determine future professional development needs. 0  Collaborative inquiry teams engaged in learning walks and peer inter-visitations will be created to identify, implement and evaluate outcomes of research-based instructional strategies and interventions to support the needs of all students in meeting CCSS. The Universal Literacy Coach will provide targeted ELA professional development for K-2 teachers. The Instructional Coach will provide coaching and mentoring to grades K-5 in ELA and math. Teachers engage in curriculum development and analyze student work to plan instruction. Paraprofessionals and staff will participate in school-wide staff meetings and professional development to continue building knowledge of CCSS and understanding of their roles in helping students meet high learning expectations. Administrators will participate in district-wide professional development opportunities to further build the instructional capacity of teachers and distribute leadership within the school to enable students to meet CCSS. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). Over the course of the year the school provides Pre-K parent engagement workshops related to Kindergarten readiness. The final parent engagement workshop consists of a kindergarten classroom visit to meet with teachers and be informed of strategies and expectations to assist with the transition to kindergarten. The school's pre-K teacher regularly engages with weekly K-5 professional development sessions, ensures curriculum is aligned with kindergarten and shares records to support transition. 1  A separate UPK Head Start program is co-located in the building. The school collaborates with the Head Start program to provide kindergarten visitation for students preparing to enter kindergarten. 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. The following teacher teams will collaborate, collect, analyze and disseminate data regarding instructional assessment: RTI, assessment team, data team, and professional learning team. These teams are made up of pedagogues from all grade levels and content areas. Through Professional Learning Mondays and use of common planning time, coaches and teachers will analyze data, identify trends, areas of strengths and need using multiple measures of assessment in both ELA and Math. Vertical and horizontal teacher teams discuss the use and collection of data with the Professional Learning Team to inform future instruction. Data sources typically include:  CCLS-aligned Benchmark Assessments  NYC Performance Tasks  NYS ELA and Mathematics Tests   Periodic Writing Assessments  Common pre- and post-unit Assessments  Student work samples Fountas and Pinnell Benchmark Assessments In light of unit goals and standards, teachers analyze data for trends and patterns, and determine existing areas of strength and future needs for instruction. Unit plans and lessons are adjusted to reflect student needs, including differentiation strategies. Professional development related to the use of these assessments is provided in the areas of :  Norming protocols SchoolNet training  Student work analysis   Data analysis    Ongoing, formative assessment Forming flexible student groups based on need Setting and monitoring student goals 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount 2  each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Column B Section Reference(s) 5E 5A, 5D Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 1,648.00 0 0 0 1,342,099.00 X X 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH). 3   Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 4  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. The Bronx New School 10X051, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the No Child Left Behind (NCLB) Act, is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students The Bronx New School, 10X051 will support parents and families of Title I students by:  Providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology;  Providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and  decision making in support of the education of their children; Fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress;  Providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments;  Sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand;  Providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community Parental Involvement and School Quality 5  The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● Actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● Engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● Ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● Support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● Maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● Conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● Provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● Host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); ● Schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., monthly Principal's Coffee and Chat with Parents, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● Translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; 6  ● Conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address the academic needs of their children and what parents can do to help The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing Parent Engagement Tuesdays set aside to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter, monthly calendars, School Informational Electronic Board in the lobby or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) The Bronx New School, 10X051 , in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of ESEA, is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessment. Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Elementary and Secondary Education Act (ESEA). I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships 7  Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences Provide general support to parents by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); 8  ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirements for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities 9  ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 0  Addendum: Community School Partnerships Directions: The Community School (CS) strategy is directly aligned to the Framework for Great Schools. Community Schools bring schools and community partners together and integrate academics, health, youth development, and family engagement to provide students with the tools and opportunities they need to succeed. The Core Services in Community Schools are Expanded Learning Time (ELT), Attendance Supports, Family Engagement, and Health & Wellness. Part 1 – Community School Partnerships Goal(s) How is the CS strategy integrated into academic instruction at your school, and what impact has it had on student academic outcomes? The Community Schools strategy is integrated into academic instruction through an after school program. Students within multi-age groups engage in STEM, music, art, dance and drama activities and projects. Academic intervention services are also provided based on student need. Families were invited to events to participate in activities alongside children. The impact on student academic outcomes include: Improved attendance Improved academic performance    Greater levels of student engagement in areas such as STEM, music, arts, and athletics Indicate the summative goal(s) of the Community School for the 2018-19 school year. Be sure to construct the goal to be SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Realistic, and Time-bound. By June 2019, students in grades K-5 receiving Academic Intervention Services will demonstrate growth in reading as evidenced by K-2 students progressing at least five reading levels as evidenced by Fountas and Pinnell Benchmark Assessments and a 5% increase in the number of Grade 3-5 students achieving proficiency (Level 3) on the Spring 2019 NYC Performance Task Assessment. By June 2019, overall student attendance will reach a 95% target rate, as evidenced by ATS data. By June 2019, the Leadership Program, in coordination with our Parent Coordinator, will deliver two family engagement workshops, events or initiatives to increase parental involvement and provide resources to support children in academic and social-emotional areas, as evidenced by home-school communications and event attendance data. Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Community School Annual Goal(s): How will achieving your Community School Goal(s)--in Expanded Learning Time (ELT), Attendance Supports, Family Engagement, and Health & Wellness--support your academic goals for students? Achieving our goals in Expanded Learning Time will support our academic goals by providing additional support to all students, especially those needing targeted interventions. Students will gain greater proficiency in reading and math to meet grade level expectations. Meeting our goals in Attendance Supports will increase overall student attendance as the program offers engaging activities as incentives to attend school. Family Engagement will increase based on our ability to meet the interests that have been expressed by parents through a survey. As more families become involved with our Community School activities and events, the family-school tie is further strengthened and positively impacts academic achievement. 1  Much of our after-school programming involves engaging physical activity and opportunities to work in peer groups, which helps the school achieve its Health and Wellness goals. The programming supports physical health and social-emotional well-being, which research has shown to make positive impacts on student achievement. Part 2 – Community School Partnerships Core Services Action Plan Part 2a. Identify the Community-based Organization (CBO) partnerships that you will develop in ELT, Attendance Supports, Family Engagement, and Health & Wellness, their target student population(s), and scope of the services provided. As well as supporting schools’ supportive environment and attendance work, CBOs should be helping to support your school’s instructional focus. CBO Partnership Leadership Program Target Population Students Scope of Service SY17-18 SMART Goal Extended Learning Time By June 2019, students in grades K-5 receiving Academic Intervention Services will demonstrate growth in reading as evidenced by K-2 students progressing at least five reading levels as evidenced by Fountas and Pinnell Benchmark Assessments and a 5% increase in the number of Grade 3-5 students achieving proficiency (Level 3) on the Spring 2019 NYC Performance Task Assessment. By June 2019, overall student attendance will reach a 95% target rate, as evidenced by ATS data. By June 2019, the Leadership Program, in coordination with our Parent Coordinator, will deliver two family engagement workshops, events or initiatives to increase parental involvement and provide resources to support children in academic and social-emotional areas, as evidenced by home-school communications and event attendance data. 21st Century Learning Students and Families Attendance Supports 21st Century Learning Families Family Engagement 2  Part 3 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 3a. Indicate resources your Community Partnership will leverage to achieve your summative SMART goal(s) and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Human Resources: Teachers will provide Academic Intervention Services; The Leadership Program artists to facilitate activities; Legacy Sports coaches to facilitate athletics; Community School Director and administration; School Safety Agent Instructional Resources: Fountas & Pinnell guided reading small group instruction; interactive writing resources; mathematics manipulative materials; Go Math! curricular resources Schedule Adjustments: Later dismissal for students enrolled in the after-school program Part 3b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) Title I SWP Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside X 21st Century SIG Grant School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 3c. Describe how the school will partner with the Lead CBO to do the following: 1. Community Schools are expected to partner with a community-based partner organization (CBO) and together with members of the School Leadership Team, hire a Community School Director. The Director will lead implementation of the asset and needs assessment process, and other critically important coordinating activities. Indicate how you will leverage this aspect of the work. Community Schools are expected to personalize the needs of all students, through strategic programming and services, as determined by the asset and needs assessment, and must also offer Expanded Learning Time (ELT) and mental health programming. In completing this section, ensure that you think about how: (1) the right services are provided to the right students and families at the right time; and (2) how you will seamlessly coordinate services with instructional programming happening throughout and outside of the school day. Indicate how you will implement this work, and describe other programming you anticipate to be in place to strengthen this initiative. Community Schools are expected to emerge as Partnership Schools, which are places where parents and families feel welcome, actively participate in the conversation and decision-making around the renewal of their schools, and have many opportunities to advocate for their children. Monthly meetings and Community School Forums engaging families and community stakeholders will be a critical part of this family engagement strategy. Describe how you will implement this aspect of the work. Community School Principals are expected to meet on a weekly basis with their Community School Director, select Assistant Principals, key staff, and other CBOs, to analyze trends in data and case manage individual students. Data tools – including the New Visions Data Sorter - and training will be available for schools to use. Indicate how you will implement this aspect of the work. 2. 3. 4. 1. Planning sessions will be held prior to the start date of the after-school program with the Community School Director to review SY 17-18 school data and finalize an action plan to meet SY18-19 summative goals in the areas of academics, attendance and family engagement. Frequent meetings will be held to assess ongoing progress. 2. Students will be placed in after-school activities based on academic needs and personal interests as evidenced through classroom assessments, attendance, and surveys. Planning and communication of academic services will be coordinated with AIS providers and classroom teachers, as well as the Attendance Team. 3  3. A parent orientation will be provided prior to the launch of SY18-19 after-school program. Additional workshops, activities and initiatives will be planned in coordination with the Parent Coordinator to increase family engagement and involvement by providing the resources needed to support academics, health and well-being in addition to the nurturing of relationships with the school and with other families. 4. The Principal, Assistant Principal, Community Schools Director and key staff will consistently meet weekly on a pre-determined day to analyze data and be kept informed of developments. Monthly meetings with AIS after school teachers will be held to assess the academic progress of students receiving services. Part 4 – Community School Partnerships Oversight Part 4a. Key Staff and Partners 1. Name and describe the scope of involvement of all community partners working in the school (include partners supporting ELT, counseling, enrichment, etc.) 2. Name the members of your Community School Team and how meetings will be organized and structured to engage all stakeholders and be focused on results. 3. Explain data strategies including the use of the data sorter, and steps that the school will take to ensure that the appropriate interventions are provided to the right students 1. The Community Schools Director will:  maintain accurate attendance records, manage enrollment and update student information  provide oversight of all enrichment activities provided by CBOs (The Leadership Program and Legacy Sports), including the assignment and management of teaching artists and coaches in the areas of art, drama, music, dance and sports  The ELT Teachers providing AIS will be supported and supervised by the Assistant Principal. The Bronx New School will:  Conduct outreach and facilitate parent communication to drive student enrollment  Determine academic, health and social-emotional needs of students based on assessments  Assign students to after-school activities based on individualized student needs  Provide AIS teachers who will provide targeted academic services for students in need 2. The members of the Community School Team are: Min Hong, Joann Khan, Julie Aponte, and Cristina Padilla. Weekly meetings with the CS Principal, CS Director and Assistant Principal will be held at a pre-determined, mutually agreed-upon day. Monthly meetings will be held with AIS providers. 3. Students will be placed in AIS based initial findings from the data sorter and baseline assessments. Individual student goals will be determined and shared across the team. AIS teachers will work in coordination with classroom teachers to monitor ongoing progress and determine future steps. Part 4b. Indicate resources needed including human resources, instructional resources, and schedule adjustments to implement the Community School program. Human Resources: Teaching artists, AIS teachers, CS Team, Parent Coordinator Instructional Resources: Provided as funding permits; resources may include: sports equipment; art supplies; drama and dance costumes and equipment; photography and video equipment; tablets/laptops; books and math manipulatives; cooking equipment; STEM supplies Schedule Adjustments: Later dismissal for students enrolled in the after-school program 4  Part 4c. Timeline for implementation and completion, including start and end dates. Start Date: October 3, 2018 End Date: June 21, 2019 Part 4d. Mental Health Work Plan Separate from this S/CEP, schools will complete a Mental Health Work Plan that will become an addendum to this document. 5  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 10 School Name The Bronx New School Borough Bronx School Number 051 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Min Hong Coach NA ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Fiorentina Nacaj Teacher/Subject Area NA Teacher/Subject Area NA Related-Service Provider Ilene Kupferman Superintendent Maribel Torres Hulla Assistant Principal Philip Scharper Coach NA School Counselor NA Parent Carmen Cruz Parent Coordinator Auldrey Lufadeju Field Support Center Staff Member Jill Schimmel Other (Name and Title) NA C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 1 1 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 192 6 Total number of ELLs 11 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 5.73%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): NA If yes, indicate language(s): NA Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 1 5 NA NA NA NA NA NA 0 6 NA NA NA NA NA NA 0 7 NA NA NA NA NA NA 0 8 NA NA NA NA NA NA 0 9 NA NA NA NA NA NA 0 10 NA NA NA NA NA NA 0 11 NA NA NA NA NA NA 0 12 NA NA NA NA NA NA 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 NA NA NA NA NA NA K NA NA NA NA NA NA 0 Lang. NA NA NA NA NA NA Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis NA NA NA NA NA NA 0 2 NA NA NA NA NA NA 0 3 NA NA NA NA NA NA 0 4 NA NA NA NA NA NA 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? NA 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? NA 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? NA 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? NA 7  5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] NA 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. NA 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? NA Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. NA b. TBE program. If applicable. NA c. DL program. If applicable. NA 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? NA 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. NA 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? NA 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status NA 8  6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? NA 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? The Bronx New School utilizes the Fountas and Pinnell Reading Benchmark System and teacher-created pre-, post-, and on-going ELA unit assessments to assess the early literacy skills of our English Language Learners. In grades K-2, the following baseline assessments are used: Letter and Sound Identification, High Frequency Words, Concepts of Print and Running Records for Reading. In grades 3-5, Running Records for Reading are used to analyze students' comprehension and word-solving skills. These assessments guide instructional planning for English Language Learners. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. Structures supporting formative assessments and instructional planning for ELLs include additional periods scheduled to administer Fountas and Pinnell Reading Assessments on a one-to-one basis. Weekly grade team meetings provide time for teachers to analyze formative assessment data with the instructional coach and/or administration, and plan for instructional differentiation within each ELA unit with strategies specifically targeting ELL students and their language acquisition. Formative assessment data is accessible to the ENL teacher to help plan for integrated and stand-alone ENL instruction. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? Summative and baseline/benchmark assessments used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need include: initial and final rounds of Fountas and Pinnell Reading Benchmark Reading Assessments, NYC BOY and EOY Performance Tasks, and the CCLS-Aligned Benchmark Assessments. The school's narrative writing assessment is administered three times per year. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? Summative data is collectively shared with the ENL teacher, classroom teachers, and AIS teacher during a meeting at the beginning of each school year. All teaching staff are trained on the Response to Intervention framework and provided with professional development on the different tiers of instruction, beginning with high-quality, effective classroom instruction that is differentiated for students' diverse needs. An AIS Teacher oversees, coordinates and implements Tier 2 and 3 interventions for students needing more intensive support. In collaboration with classroom teachers, these interventions are coordinated with the ENL and SETTS teachers when applicable. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. In addition to formative and summative assessments, teachers keep running records, unit assessments and other informal anecdotal records to inform instruction for ELLs. Data is analyzed in an ongoing, systematic manner as Tier 1 instruction is implemented with strategies that have shown to be effective for ELLs. After a 6-week cycle, the LAP team evaluates individual student progress and determines whether individual students need more intensive academic interventions at Tiers 2 or 3. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. ELA, Math and NYSESLAT assessments are outcome indicators used to evaluate and inform the school's ELL program. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Findings from ELA, Math, and NYSESLAT assessments are shared and analyzed among the ENL and classroom teachers during weekly grade team meetings and professional learning sessions. Data is available and accessible via a Google Team Drive. 9  14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. As per CR 154.42, the required instructional minutes are implemented in two ways at the Bronx New School. First, English as a New Language (ENL) is integrated in the ELA core content area of each grade level, with ELL students of mixed proficiency levels within each class. Classroom teachers administer and analyze formative classroom assessments for each ELA unit of study and differentiate instruction according to students' needs. Students engage in activities for language acquisition, content and academic vocabulary development, and reading comprehension. Students are also provided additional support in the forms of manipulatives and other hands-on visual tools to deepen and extend learning experiences. Second, a Freestanding English as a New Language (ENL) Program is provided for students who are identified as requiring stand-alone ENL instruction. Students are placed in heterogeneous, ungraded groups. The ENL teacher utilizes research-based instructional strategies to provide services that amplify the literacy and academic skills necessary for ELLs to achieve grade level performance. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? N/A 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). N/A 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? In compliance with CR Part 154, ELL students receive 90-360 minutes per week of ENL instruction based on current proficiency levels. A dual-certified ENL teacher provides English as a New Language instruction for ELL students via stand-alone or integrated ENL instruction, or a combination thereof, depending on student proficiency levels. With the school's ELL students at approximately 6% of the overall student population, or roughly 12 students, the master schedule ensures that the mandated number of instructional minutes are provided by the ENL teacher in collaboration with classroom teachers. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? Students of limited English proficiency receive the same academic content as those students who are native English speakers. In order to maximize English language acquisition for ELLs, the ENL teacher delivers literacy instruction and tailors additional content instruction to meet the needs of ELLs. Through Pre-teaching, Scaffolding and Modeling, teachers make an impact on student progress. Additionally, language development is targeted across the grades and content areas by creating opportunities for active student engagement with activities such as accountable talk. Teachers prioritize the language needs of ELLs, modifying their instructional language and scaffolding instruction to ensure student understanding. For example, classroom teachers monitor the understanding of linguistically challenging material and use phrasing and synonyms in order to clarify meaning, scaffold difficult word problems and use visual aids such as maps, atlases, and illustrations to increase comprehension. The ENL teacher modifies and supplements the curriculum in accordance with ENL teaching methodologies. The use of technology is also an important component in ENL instruction because of the 0  interactive, multi-sensory nature of language development computer software. Spanish books (including dictionaries, content picture dictionaries and glossaries) have been purchased for use by ELL students. Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? The Spanish LAB test is administered, if required, when Spanish-speaking students are newly-enrolled. ELLs in early stages of English language development are not discouraged from using their native languages. Classroom teachers and other school-based staff who are proficient in a student's home language will use such language for clarification purposes. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. 6a. As per CR Part 154.2, Former ELLs who have exited ELL status receive 90 minutes of integrated ENL in the ELA content areas. Although P.S. 51 does not have a wide range of ELL subgroups, the following plan is in place to differentiate instruction for all ELL subgroups: For the SIFE population: For Newcomers: When a new student is registered in our school, we provide the following resources to facilitate transition: Newcomers who have been in the US schools for less than three years are provided with strategies and materials used to scaffold learning such as picture dictionaries, photo cards, and manipulatives. Students work in small groups with their classroom teachers targeting specific areas of need. Developing ELLs: Our plan for Developing ELLs receiving services for 0 to 3 years is to provide them with the same support structures detailed above along with a heightened focus on phonics intervention and acquiring content and academic vocabulary. P.S.51's curriculum includes Wilson's Fundations in grades K-2. The instructional materials that are used with all students needing a greater level of support are also used with ELL students, such as picture dictionaries, visual aids, and vocabulary word walls. ELL students are grouped heterogeneously across all subject areas to facilitate increased opportunities for student-to-student dialogue and engagement. A combination of integrated and stand-alone ENL instruction will be implemented. Long Term ELLs: Students reaching Expanding Proficiency Levels will engage in integrated ENL instruction based in the classroom. Former ELLs: Students reaching Commanding Proficiency Levels will receive continued support with small group instruction based in the classroom. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? Teachers of ELL-SWDs use a variety of modified instructional strategies and grade-level materials to aid in their instruction: scaffolding, picture dictionaries, photo cards, manipulatives, books with text support features and graphic organizers. Such strategies provide access to academic content and accelerate English language development. Once the School Based Support Team (SBST) has evaluated the ELL-SWD and determined the services the student needs, each service provider (e.g. ESL, speech, etc.) is informed. The different service providers coordinate the student's schedule with each other to ensure 1  mandates are implemented. If an IEP mandates bilingual instruction, the SBST team finds an appropriate placement for the child in District 10. If it is not possible to find a proper placement for the student or if the parent chooses to keep the child in this school, the student automatically receives ENL services. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. We provide differentiated and modified instruction to meet the diverse needs of ELL-SWDs, who are expected to meet the standards. The curriculum includes options to modify instruction for ELL-SWDs as needed to ensure IEP goals are met and English proficiency is attained. The master schedule supports efforts for classroom teachers and ENL/IEP teachers to coordinate integrated and stand-alone instruction as well as monitor student progress in reaching IEP goals and English proficiency. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. The targeted interventions programs for ELLs in ELA are: The Kings Reading Series, Interactive Writing and Fundations. For Math we use the GO Math Intervention System. The Freestanding ENL program uses a Balanced Literary Workshop approach in the delivery of instruction. This includes the use of high interest / low level texts. For math instruction, we utilize the GO Math! program. There is a specific emphasis on the unpacking of word problems for each unit as well as re-teach section for each lesson. The GO Math! program also includes specific strategies to use for the ELL population and a classroom library. Frontloading strategies will be used during math instruction to support ELL students. When using this strategy, teachers introduce new vocabulary and discuss concepts before teaching them. Frontloading prepares students for new concepts and sets the stage to eliminate potential language problems. The benefits for English Language Learners are: academic vocabulary is introduced for each lesson, support is provided for the content knowledge needed to access the lessons, students are engaged in lessons that use visuals and multiple forms of media used to present concepts, and manipulatives are used for each unit. The exception to this pattern is where materials are used to familiarize students with the state assessments, including: Students who need Academic Intervention Services are identified by the classroom teacher, administration and AIS teacher. Their needs are addressed through guided reading, Reading Recovery and 1:1 support. In order to support learning and foster community involvement, we use a portion of our funding to create supplementary programs for ELLS and their families. These include: Translation and Interpretation Services: Funding is available to translate important policy documents in Spanish and Mandarin. We hope to be able to provide a similar Science intervention program as well as a math intervention program this school year. All intervention services are offered in English since our school has no TBE or DL programs. There are currently two languages spoken by our ELLs. 2  Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Based on the data and trends, the following improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year. Ongoing professional development will be provided to teachers to improve best practices in ELA and Math in the areas of Differentiated Instruction, Writing and Guided Reading, specifically targeted for ELL subgroups. Grade Team meetings will be held to plan for instruction in ELA and Math. During these meetings, teachers plan units of study and analyze student work samples to identify areas of strengths and weaknesses and create appropriate next steps. , testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 3  4  Part VI: LAP Assurances 5  School Name: The Bronx New School does not have a bilingual program. School DBN: ELLs at P.S.51 have equal access to all school programs and supplemental services offered in our building. They are available to all parents and students through the SBST family worker, parent coordinator, occupational therapist, speech and language therapist, and psychologist. Students take part in community building projects. An after-school program offering sports and arts activities is open to all students during the school year. Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Title Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) Not Applicable ENL/Bilingual Teacher The ENL teacher is sent to workshops and will turnkey information to classroom teachers. We keep a record of all professional development sessions, including attendance records, agendas, and Parent 6 Name (PRINT) The instructional materials that are used to support ELLs focus on balanced literacy and Go Math. They are in alignment with Common Core Learning Standards. Other instructional materials that P.S.51 will use include listening libraries, phonics activity sets, writing journals, letter-tile spelling activities and photo cards. The ESL teacher has conversations with the classroom teachers on all grade levels to ask for input on students' individual strengths and needs. Our ELL population is quite small, and as such, we conduct parent orientations as children are enrolled and identified as an eligible for ENL instructional services. P.S.51 offers and invites parents to an orientation for ENL students during the first month of school. We utilize the bilingual staff members or over the phone translation if necessary. Principal Assistant Principal Parent Coordinator Home language support is assessed and delivered in ENL instruction. The LAP team recommends the acquisition of books and other literature in as many of the English Language learners' languages as possible. Software for listening centers was purchased for the ENL class. We do not share a building with any other NYC DOE school. Not Applicable The ENL teacher is sent to district-wide professional development workshops, and turnkeys information to all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff. The district representative visits our school for individualized support. We individually meet with the parents of English language learners at least once a year. In addition to parent-teacher conferences, ELL parent orientations, and other scheduled meetings to  documentation on ENL areas of focus. As per CR Part 154:2, teachers will receive support in scaffolding techniques as well as quality teaching for ELLs. Our school will provide professional development to all teachers and administrators to specifically address the needs of our English language learners. The minimum of fifteen percent (15%) of the required professional development hours for all teachers prescribed by CR Part 80 will be dedicated to language acquisition, including a focus on best practices and content instruction for English language learners. For our English as a New Language teacher, the minimum of fifty percent (50%) of the required professional development hours will be dedicated to language acquisition in alignment with core content area instruction, including a focus on best practices for integrating language and content instruction for English language learners. All parents are invited to curriculum workshops, celebrations of learning within classrooms, PTA meetings and parent workshops. Interpretation is always available to include parents of ELL students. Min Hong 10X051 10/18/18 10/18/18 10/18/18 10/18/18 discuss the goals of the ENL program, their child’s language development progress, English language proficiency assessment results, and future language development needs in all content areas. Such meetings are conducted with a qualified interpreter/translator in the home language or mode of communication the parent or guardian best understands. Teacher/Subject Area Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach School Counselor Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Carmen Cruz NA Bronx New School Min Hong Philip Scharper Auldrey Lufadeju Fiorentina Nacaj 10/18/18 7  Yvette Santiago Other 10/18/18 10/18/18 N/A Other N/A Other N/A Cindy Aguila N/A N/A 8 2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools School Name: The Bronx New School Superintendent: Maribel Hulla DBN: 10X051 The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this Auldrey Lufadeju Parent Coordinator NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Yes NA NA NA No NA NA NA * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. The Bronx New School uses data to capture the language preferences of all our parents. Our initial meeting comprises of filling out the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS) in order to assess parents' needs. Data is captured through the use of ATS reports (RESI, RMNR, RLAT, RHLA, RPOB, RAPL, RCPL) and inputting data from ATS into the Data Analysis and AMAO tool. By looking at various data points we are able to assess the parent needs. With the assistance of our Parent Coordinator, we are able to identify those parents who need written information in another language, and assistance from interpreters, especially during the Parent Teacher Conferences. 9  2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Arabic Chinese Any English Spanish 1 3 224 67 0.3 1.19 79.53 18.99 1 4 268 64 0.3 1.19 79.53 18.99 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. NA Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families Summer Mailing August Parent Teacher Conferences October and February PTA and SLT Monthly Notices Monthly Chancellor's Back Packed Notices Ongoing School-wide memos and flyers Ongoing Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. Big Word or Personnel translates the documents Big Word or Personnel translates the documents Personnel translates the monthly documents Chancellor's back packed notices provide translated documents Personnel translates the ongoing documents 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. 0  Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide Back to School Night (i.e., Curriculum Night) September Parent Teacher Conferences October for November conferences February for March conferences IEP Meetings Ongoing (at least two weeks prior to IEP meeting) Parent Engagement Tuesdays Two weeks prior to the PE Tuesday event interpretation service(s)? -School Personnel -Big Word -Language Line "Hello Parent" Phone Script -School Personnel -Language Line -Teachers will use the Three-Step flyer to access Language Line to provide parents with appropriate interpretation services. -School Personnel -Language Line -Teachers will use the Three-Step flyer to access Language Line to provide parents with appropriate interpretation services. -Interpretation provided by school personnel -Big Word 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. - We will use School Personnel for Spanish Speaking Families who need the immediate attention. - We will use Language Line (i.e., Use phone script) to collect specific information needed to find the necessary language interpretation support. -We will use Language Line (Train staff to use the 3-way call system) to communicate with families -We will use the K-12 Alerts (text, email, and phone message) as a way to reach out to English and Spanish speaking families. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure 1  Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Language Line is a resource that is available in the administrative manual. LAC will turnkey information to school personnel during opening day. School personnel will receive a packet with phone numbers, scripts, and surveys to express support needed for seamless and ongoing translation and interpretation services for families. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) As per the Chancellor’s Regulations A-663 regarding parental notification requirements for translation and interpretation service, The Bronx New school – PS 51x provides the following: Home language preference sheets for translation and interpretation services for both written and oral communication. The principal utilizes personnel to translate and interpret during PTA, SLT, PTC and other school meetings. A school staff member or parent provides translation services. In addition, Big Word and Language Line will be used as a form to translate and interpret for families. As a common practice, the school sends out bilingual notifications to parents. In addition, Chancellor's Backpacked items are sent in specific languages for families. Multilingual Welcome poster and language ID guide are displayed. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? The Bronx New School will use the Language Translation & Interpretation Parent Survey to improve translation and interpretation services for families. The survey results and feedback will be used to modify and create a seamless and exemplary system to improve communication with all families. 2 
