 11X083 School Name: P.S. 083 DONALD HERTZ Principal: BRANDON MUCCINO 2018-19 CEP-CS 1  Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC)   School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information School Number (DBN): 11X083 Donald Hertz 321100010083 K-8 950 Rhinelander Ave. Bronx, NY 10462 718-863-1993 Phone Number: 718-863-5525 Fax: Brandon Muccino bmuccin@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Geographical District: 11 Superintendent’s Office Address: Email Address: Brandon Muccino Roseanna Ayala ErmelindaPagano Brandon Muccino Lisa Farago none Laura Silva District Information Meisha Ross-Porter Superintendent: 1250 Arnow Avenue mross@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718-519-2668 Phone Number: Fordham Plaza Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) Jose Ruiz FSC: Executive Director:   1 Fordham Plaza, Bronx, NY 10458 and 1230 Zerega Avenue, Bronx, NY 10462 Executive Director’s Office Address: jruiz2@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 917) 608-0230 Phone Number: Fax:   Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Brandon Muccino Rosanna Ayala ErmelindaPagano Elisa Piparo George Erazo Sadie Weihe Laura Weihe Nathalie Rosa-Leon Jessica Loaiza *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Teacher Teacher Parent Parent   Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Stephanie Sifonte Parent Laura Silva Cindy Lomonaco CBO (New York Edge) CBO (Community Learning School) Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/   Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with   the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement   Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? In partnership with parents and the community, P.S. 83 is dedicated to creating global learners on the path to college and careers by engaging students in authentic, rigorous learning experiences. In a safe, nurturing environment, children will become responsible citizens of the school and the world.   2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. PS 83 is a K-8 school of approximately 1700 students from various cultures and socioeconomic backgrounds. The school receives Title 1 funding and we have a universal free lunch program. Housed in 2 buildings, the school population includes 15% ENL students, and 19% Students with Disabilities. There are 1 to 2 ICT classes at each grade level and 7 self-contained special education classes. We have an active Parent Teacher Association with well-attended events and meetings. The PTA and school plan many parent events on evenings, mornings, and weekends. Topics are based on needs assessments performed by all aspects of the school community. Our school mission is “In partnership with parents and the community, PS 83 is dedicated to creating global learners on the path to college and careers by engaging students in authentic, rigorous learning experiences. In a safe, nurturing environment, children will become responsible citizens of the school and the world.” For the past four years, we have been designated a Community School by NYS and receive associated funding as well as a resource coordinator. We partner with many community based organizations in order to offer students and families opportunities and activities in the areas of health and wellness, the arts, college and career readiness and academics. Current partners include but are not limited to Bronx Arts Ensemble, Food Bank for NYC, Green Generations, Creative Connection, and The Sports And Arts in Schools Foundation. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. ENL students make up approximately 15% of our student population and their standardized test scores fall far below their non-ENL counterparts. Immigration from middle eastern countries has increased greatly in the last 5 years. With this growing population, we will work more collaboratively with our ENL department, holding regular meetings between ENL staff and school administration and we will ask ENL leaders to turnkey more often information to those working with the ENL population, stressing the shared goal of improvement for all, creation of an inclusive environment, and readiness for college and careers. Our Students with Disabilities population is also growing and the students in this subgroup often struggle on the standardized exams. We are committed to building trust within this and all populations by increasing professional development opportunities for special education teachers, increasing opportunities for parents of this and all populations to access meaningful information during parent engagement Tuesdays, and increasing the number of special education certified personnel in the building so that students have access to additional services. Finally, we are committed to working with our African American males whose test scores average lower than their non-African-American counterparts. Last year we formed our first Equity committee to ensure that this and all subgroups feel valued and recognized and that our teaching methods are in line with the needs of each student. In June we set 2018-19 goals for this committee that included forming cultural celebration groups and the formation of a inter-building ambassador club. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. 0  Our biggest success with regard to the Framework for Great Schools was in building collaboration among teachers.With a score well above the city and district averages on the 2016-17 School Quality guide, we have worked to build capacity among teacher teams, practice distributive leadership and create a risk-free learning and teaching environment for staff. According to the 2016-17 School Quality Snapshot, our students outscored their comparison groups in attaining levels 3 or 4 in both ELA and Math.. In 2017, our ELA scores increased by 2%. In 2017-18 we remained a School in Good Standing and we believe our strong collaborative practices contributed to this. In 2017-18, we once again remained a school in good standing with scores rising approximately 4% in both ELA and Math. We would like to place stronger emphasis on building strong family-community ties. In 2018-19, our community schools resource coordinator will expand her role to full-time to support the administration, parent coordinator and families in creating inclusive experiences for all. PS 83 has made great strides in welcoming, encouraging and developing partnerships with families, businesses and community based organizations. Our Strong Family Community Ties survey rating for the 2016-17 was higher than two years prior, but dipped slightly, indicating a need for more academic based learning opportunities for parents. 1  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 11X083 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 0K,01,02,03,04,05,06,07,08 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 1698 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 87 88 68 20 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 129 124 45 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 64.0% % Attendance Rate 63.2% % Reduced Lunch 17.5% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.6% 48.2% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 35.0% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 5.08 0% 11% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 45.7% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 80% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A YES YES NO YES Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A NO YES NO NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A NO NO NO NO High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 63 147 95.2% 0.6% 18.8% 6.7% 9.0% 1.1% 10 29% 6.9 40.4% 52% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No YES YES N/A NO YES NO YES N/A NO YES N/A NO N/A NO NO N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. PS 83’s mission and instructional focus are rooted in rigorous instructional practices. Teachers participate in self-selected data based inquiry teams, differentiated and targeted professional development, intervisitations and weekly grade/departmental planning meetings to ensure that curriculum is challenging and meets students’ needs. The ELA Department adopted Performance Series in order to monitor student progress with regard to lexile level in grades 3-8. In addition, the school purchased iReady online accounts for all students in grades K-8, while our ENL student population continues to work with Imagine Learning as they began implementation in January of last year. This program instructs students in English and, at times, in their native language, provides valuable data for teachers and recommends small group instructional materials. There is also a renewed focus on independent reading and conferencing in all classrooms to ensure students are comfortable with working on their own and, at times, productively struggling. This independent reading focus is connected to students reading first on their own so that they can then collaborate with others, sharing evidence and transferring their ideas to text based writing. In grades K-4, students conference with teachers using the routines embedded in the the 100 Book Challenge program. Grades 3-4 wil be using this program for the first time this year. In addition to lending books just from the two school libraries, students now have the opportunities to borrow from collections housed in each assistant principal's office, ensuring that any day of the week, a child has access to new and exciting text that they can bring home and enjoy. While students made overall gains in ELA on the 2017 and 2018 standardized exams, we are concerned that we did not keep pace with NY State proficiency levels in these grades. Performance of subgroups indicates the need for increased support for ENL's, SWD's and students of color. Students with disabilities on the 2018 NYS ELA and Math exams, for the most part, underperformed their citywide subgroup. This year we will add additional ICT classes on grade 4 and 5. Finally, in order to strengthen mathematical practices, grade 5 will departmentalize and teachers will be exposed to mathematical workshops where they solve mathematical problems and delve deeply into math concepts. One teacher each in grades 5 through 8 will participate in Algebra for All training over the summer. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. 3  As a result of implementation of the 100 Book Challenge program and aligned conferencing strategies in grades 3 and 4, by June 2019, 42% of students in grades 3 and 4 will receive a level 3 or 4 on the NYS ELA exam. 4  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Instructional Resources: 100 Book Challenge, grades 3 and 4 Grade 3 and 4 students Staffing and Staff Interactions: Addition of grade 4 ICT teacher Grade 3 and 4 staff members 2 full days of Professional Development for grades 3 and 4 on 100 Book Challenge and conferencing strategies Scheduling of Literacy Block by administrators to include conferencing periods and small group instruction Imagine Learning implemented as well as 100 Book Challenge for all ELL students. Training on 100 Book Challenge for ENL teachers Family/Community Engagement: all PS 83 families Family events added in morning and attached to PTA meetings in evening re: how to support learning in new programs introduced and how best to support reading practices at home Administration, teachers, staff developers, paraprofessionals 100 Book Challenge consultants, literacy coach, staff developers, administration Parent Coordinator, PTA, administraion, CLS resource coordinator Sept. 2018 to June 2019 with benchmarks IReady Diagnostic in Feb. 2019 School Pace data review monthly Sept. 2018 to June 2019 with benchmarks IReady Diagnostic in Feb. 2019 School Pace data review monthly Family Welcome Back Event in September, Literacy Night in November, Academic 5  Information Mornings in October, January, and March (at minimum), Wellness Learning family events bi-monthly, Community Schools Forum in June, Family Wellness day in May. PTA meetings monthly 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. 100 Book Challenge, Performance Series, and IReady programs embed opportunities for families to understand their child’s needs and work to support improvement. Performance Series progress and data reports provide information for families such as student strengths and weaknesses, recommended reading levels and even recommended reading titles. IReady can be used at home year-round giving families the opportunity to read and work together. 100 Book Challenge provides tangible incentives as students complete steps and students bring books home to increase their independent reading time. This year, we have scheduled 5 Family Mornings where parents can receive training on these three programs in order to deepen the connection and use between the school and the home. Our parent coordinator, in conjunction with staff developers, will turnkey this information to parents as she meets with them on a daily basis. During the school year, parents are also invited into classrooms for Tuesday parent events that give a glimpse into the work and accomplishments of classes on a regular basis. K-2 Literacy Pajama night engages families in activities and routines that can be brought home and used throughout the year. Our adoption of Skeula also opens the lines of communication between families and the school, providing the chance for ongoing dialogue. Events are planned in cooperation with the principal and his cabinet, along with the parent coordinator, PTA and Title 1 committee. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Staff developers and teachers will be paid per session to facilitate family events, Title I/FSF funds will be used to purchase program materials and training time. Tax Levy funding was used to hire additional ICT teacher. Community Schools funding will assist with professional development funding. 6  Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind X Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. The I Ready diagnostic exam will be given in February of 2019. This is a proven predictor of students scores and identifies strengths and weaknesses for each learner. By February of 2019, 42% of students' scores will indicate proficiency on the upcoming NYS ELA exam in June of 2019. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) IReady February 2019 Diagnostic Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 7  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? Needs Assessment According to the 2017 School Performance Dashboard, Supportive Environment received the second highest Framework Score with a 3.78 (meeting the standard). We have implemented PBIS intitiatives, use of Project Boost funds, many after school clubs and activities which bring students and staff together, as well as an expanded commitment to the community schools model and we believe all of these contribute to our success. The 2015-16 Framework student survey noted that approximately one third do not feel it is very important to come to school every day. In order to raise student achievement, students must feel that they are a vital member of the school community. In order to improve how some students view the importance of attendance, the principal has formed an attendance committee led by a dean and an F status assistant principal. These co-chairs meet with deans and a school aide who monitors attendance weekly to ensure that every chronically absent student’s family is contacted weekly at minimum. In addition, guidance counselors collaborate with the attendance team to monitor progress and update the team of any special circumstances. This year, the Equity Team is also piloting a program where certain chronically absent students receive an "attendance mentor" who will reach out to the identified student daily to create a targeted attendance plan. Middle school students were not receiving the required minutes for health education, leaving some students with less emotional support than necessary. This year, in collaboration with PE works, middle school students will receive a period of health education weekly and much of these lessons will focus on mental/emotional wellness and stress management. The PBIS system also incorporates an attendance component, offering prize opportunities for those with perfect and greatly improved attendance. Finally, as a community school, deans and administrators have access to an absence tracking tool that allows us to more quickly and efficiently track attendance. FInally, our newly formed Equity Committee will address the issue of the comfort level of our ENL students and families and work toward communicating that school is a welcoming and safe place to be and families from all cultural backgrounds will gain a fuller understanding of the importance of consistent daily attendance. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. 8  Members of the attendance and/or equity teams will “adopt” one student on the chronically absent list. In addition, the Equity team focus will be on cultural appreciation and the importance of regular attendance. As a result, by June 2019, the number of critical absent students will decrease by 10%. 9  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Programs / Partnerships: Partnership with PE Works to add additional PE teacher to teach Health including both emotional and physical topics to middle school students in order to increase well-being and attendance rates. Green Generations is an after school program that meets the needs of our students in need of social/emotional support Use of NYC DOE Attendance tracking online program for use by the administration and attendance committee Staffing and Staff Interactions: PBIS Committee will continue to build attendance incentives into its programs. Additional physical education teacher will proviide health and wellness lessons to all middle school students. Attendance team members meet on a weekly basis and turnkey information to administration weekly. Additional members will include one assistant principal, a guidance counselor, one member of the Equity Committee, and the Community School 20 students in grades 2 and 3 and their families for Green Generations, all students for PBIS assemblies and rewards activities 0 Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? all chronically absent students September 2018 –June 2019 Principal, administration, parent coordinator, community school director, attendance team members, Green Generations staff, guidance counselors PBIS committee members including administration, teachers, deans, and teachers/staff sponsoring PBIS reward activities Attendance committee including deans, part time attendance teacher and F status assistant principal in Monthly check-ins with Green Generations facilitators for student progress updates, review of Health progress reports quarterly, weekly deans meetings to review OORS data September 2018 to June 2019: Deans meet weekly to review OORS data, attendance team meets weekly using the HEAT MAP to review attendance and Director. Each member will 'adopt" a student to track specifically and to be the point person for outreach. School/Family Engagement Deans, SLT, PTA and curriculum team will plan assemblies and evening events that highlight the importance of daily attendance and its connection to mastering the standards of each grade. Equity Team will plan cultural celebration events that ensure that all families feel valued and welcomed. Attendance team members will reach out to the families of chronically absent students regularly. Guidance counselors reach out to families of chronically absent students to offer additional support and resources All students in grades 1 through 8, all families of PS 83 charge of attendance Deans, SLT members, PTA executive board, Euqity Committee, attendance team members, administration, guidance counselors academic trends among chronically absent students September 2018 to June 2019: Monthly Equity team meetings (sub committees may meet more often) to review overall building culture, data and attendance among cultural subgroups 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. The issue of lateness and attendance will be addressed at PTA and SLT meetings. Parents of students who are chronically absent will be contacted on a weekly basis at minimum and counselors will reach out to family members to offer possible resources that could assist families with attendance obstacles. Raffles and prizes will be awarded to those families with improved attendance. An F Status assistant principal spearheads all attendance programs, routines and protocols. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Green Generations is funded through Community Schools funding, PBIS rewards are partially funded by PTA funds and partially through Project Boost and community schools funds, evening events are paid for through Title I and Title III funding. PE works funds the additional staff member for one year. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. 1  X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA Title II, Part A SIG X PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, deans will use the online attendance tracking tool (HEAT MAP)to determine if the number of chronically absent students has decreased by 10% Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. NYC DOE attendance tracking tool Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Collaboration among teachers was rated highest on the 2017-18 School Quality Guide and on our last Quality Review, our rating for Teacher Collaboration was Highly effective. Many teachers facilitate workshops for others and host intervisitations. Teachers are comfortable seeking out their own professional development and then turnkeying their new learning to others. Our lowest ratings on the Collaborative Teachers portion of the Framework survey were in the areas of teachers taking risks and trying new ideas (62% and 73% respectively). In surveys where teachers expressed what they needed to work on, the majority expressed that they would like to better handle students in crisis within their own classrooms. We believe that if teachers were provided research based strategies in a risk free setting where they have options on what areas to study and improve they may be more encouraged to integrate new ideas. Last year, teachers chose to participated in a number of self-directed inquiry cycles from September to January. This allowed teachers to meet across grades and departments. When surveyed following the cycles, teachers expressed that one of the best parts of the experience was the opportunity to meet with teachers across grade levels so that instructors understood the expectations not only on their grade levels but above and below. Many also expressed that they would like further training in how to deal with students in crisis in their own classrooms before finding it necessary to call a dean or write a student anecdotal to families. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound.  In an effort to unite staff in and achieve consistency in crisis intervention practices, 100% of teachers will work in teams to participate in/facilitate Crisis Intervention training. As a result, levels 1, 2, and 3 OORS reports will decrease by 10% and teachers will report in surveys increased positive feelings (10% from September to June) of collaboration and support with regard to dealing with students in crisis. 3  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs,  professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Programs: Resources: All teachers, paraprofessionals Oct 2018 to June 2019 Lifespace Crisis Intervention turnkey materials including articles, power points and videos will be utilized at monthly Monday PD meetings. In additon, optional additional support sessions will be available monthly facilitated by the IEP teacher and/or guidance counselors. Staffing/Staff Interactions: All teachers All teachers and paraprofessionals will receive training in Crisis Intervention in large or small groups. The IEP teacher, guidance counselors and those staff already trained will serve as facilitators. Family Engagement: All families Parents will be made aware of this training for staff at SLT and PTA meetings. Families will be encouraged to reach out to counselors for similar materials to be used at home. Community Learning Schools school based director will inform parents and staff about additional mental health services for the school community including stress management tactics for employees. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Staff developers, administration, guidance counselors, IEP teacher Administrations, staff developers, teachers, guidance counselors, IEP teacher Monthly - PD Lifespace Crisis Intervention training; optional support meetings October 2018 to June 2019 (see above) October 2018 to June 2019: Participating teachers and families, parent coordinator Monthly PTA and SLT meetings, monthly newsletter from CSD. How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. 4  This year, the basics of the Crisis Intervention training will be shared with families at SLT and PTA meetings so families understand steps teachers will take to deescalate any classroom crisis situations. In addition, counselors, and an IEP teacher will offer a workshop offering deescalation ideas and resources for home use. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Per session will be paid for through Title I funds, Title I parent involvement funds and Title III funds. Materials for family events will be paid for through Title I funds as well as partially sponsored by PTA funds. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA Title II, Part A SIG X PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February of 2019, OORS reports for Levels 1-3 will be reduced by 10% as compared to reports as of February 2018 as a result of improved teacher practices aligned to comprehensive LifeSpace Crisis intervantion training. In addition, teachers surveyed in October and February of this school year will reflect a minimum of a 10% increase in positive feelings of collaboration and confidence with regard to dealing with students in crisis. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. OORS system data for tiered infractions, teacher online surveys regarding feelings of confidence and collaboration with regard to crisis intervention Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 5  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. According to the 2017 School Performance Dashboard, our framework score in Effective School Leadership meets the benchmark standard with a score of 3.27. In the Framework survey completed in 2017, parents responded positively (90% or higher) to all questions related to Effective School Leadership. In the same survey, 100% of teachers feel there is consistency in curriculum, instruction and learning. Upon examination of the middle school schedule, however, it has been noted several years in a row by guidance counselors and the physical education department that middle school students do not receive the proper number of minutes of physical education and some middle school classes receive no health education, putting them at risk for misunderstanding their own physical and emotional issues and well-being. As a result, this year, we have added a staff member as part of a PE Works program to ensure that we meet the physical education and health requirements of all 7th and 8th grade teachers. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Through collaboration with PE Works and a redesign of the middle school schedule, 100% of students in grades 7 and 8 will receive at least the minimum required minutes of health and physical education, thus increasing their knowledge of health and wellness related issues relevant to young adults and adults. 6  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Resources/Programs: Scheduling tools, PE Works, Health Program aligned to NYC standards students in grades 7 and 8 September 2018 to June 2019 Principal, school curriculum team, teachers, physical education teachers All students in grades 7 and 8 will receive twice weekly gym and once weekly Health lessons throughout the year with a mid year assessment in Health to determine student progress October 2018 to June 2019 Weekly PE PD sessions for health curriculum planning, resource acquisition and PE works communication middle school teachers and students PE Works, administration, physical education teachers Families of middle school students September 2018 to June 2019 Principal, staff developers, PE teachers Staffing/Staff Interactions: Additional physical education teacher will work with current physical education teachers to fill the gaps that lead to non-compliance with health education minutes. Administration will plan throughout the summer on a re-design of the middle school schedule to accommodate health education without reducing required minutes of academic subjects. Health Information Materials will be available in alternate languages for students and families. Health teacher will be aware of all IEP goals for Students with Disabilities and modify health lessons accordingly. Family/Community Engagement: 7 Families will receive updates on topics presented in health classes through Google Classroom and information sent home. Families will be invited to an end-of year Health and Wellness Fair. Monthly Google Classroom updates on PE page, Health and Wellness Fair in May, bi-monthly wellness family events and CookShop evenings 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Through the lens of Wellness, the Wellness Council is comprised of staff, administration and parents/guardians. All members receive training that allows them to turnkey valuable health and wellness information. Parent members have and will continue to facilitate evening family workshops in order to share their own best practices with regard to spreading the message of wellness in homes and the community as a whole. In addition, as part of the Community Schools Initiative, the CSD, parent coordinator and staff and PTA will identify parents to be trained as parent leaders so that they can assist in growing family events with regard to not only wellness but other issues that affect the school and the community. This parent training begins tentatively in October and Wellness Council meetings begin in November. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Title 1 funds will be used to purchase health classroom materials and additional physical education supplies. Title 1 funds will also be used to pay per session rate to staff who facilitate Wellness Council Events. PE Works grant funding provides an additional physical education teacher free of charge for the first year. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. The curriculum team will examine data in February of 2019 to ensure that 100% seventh and eight graders are meeting the scheduled requirements for physical education and health. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. 8  class schedules, attendance sheets Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 9  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. In the Framework for Great Schools survey, parent responses were less positive than teacher responses and particular answers indicate that parents would like more access to the school building to volunteer or attend school wide events related to student instruction. In addition, we have held a limited number of after school Tuesday Parent Outreach events and attendance has been low. As a result, PS 83 will increase the number of Tuesday Parent Engagement activities and relate them directly to ways parents can serve as partners in student instruction. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound.  By June 2019, parents will have the opportunity to participate in 5 morning/evening Meet and Greet sessions regarding instructional programs and materials (Performance Series, IReady, Pupil Path etc). As a result, the number of parents subscribing to the Skedula information system will increase by 20% and responses to regularly issued parent feedback surveys will increase in favorability by 10% by year’s end. 0  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Staffing/Staff Interactions: In grade level meetings, teacher teams will determine relevant topics for Parent Outreach events and plan dates. Teacher teams will also review PTA survey results in order to determine what parents say they need assistance with when working in partnership to educate their child. Finally, the community schools director will survey parents identifying additional needs. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Families of PS 83, students September 2018 to June 2019: Classroom teachers, support staff, administration Sept. - CSD parent survey Oct - PTA parent needs assessment Oct - Parent meet and greets begin and are approximately bi-monthly Feburary - mid way CSD surveys for forum planning June - Forum with feedback surveys October 2018 to June 2019 (see above) Classroom teachers, support staff, SLT and PTA members, adminsitration, parent coordinator Family/Community Engagement: The SLT, PTA and Parent coordinator, in conjunction with administration and classroom teachers, will plan on best practices for disseminating information to parents about the events as well as the format for events that will best serve working parents or those with small children. Family members of PS 83 students Parent feedback surveys will be disseminated at Outreach events in order to determine effectiveness and next steps. 1  . Resources/Programs Parents of ENL students October 2018 to June 2019 Parents will receive translated information at each event and translators will be available to assist. (see above) ESL department representatives, translators, families of PS 83 students, administrators and classroom teachers 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. Families will be invited to both morning and evening events including in class visits, that allow them to further understand the instructional practices of the school as well as how to help students succeed with practices at home. The 5 Family Mornings will tentatively take place in September, October, November, January and May. Additional dates may be added as parents or staff express the need. Assistant principals will work with classroom teachers and staff developers to plan the meetings and the parent coordinator will plan the logistics (invites, location, refreshments) Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Per session will be paid for evening events through Title I and Title III funding. Translators will be paid for through translation funds. Resources including printed materials will be created using Title 1 and Title III funds. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Administration, Parent Coordinator and CSD will track number of events across grade levels as well as track attendance trends at these events. By February 2019, a minimum of three parent events in addition to PTA and SLT meetings that directly relate to student instruction will have been offered and a mid-year parent survey will be conducted by the CSD. By February 2019, parent positivity on a 1-10 scale should increase by 10% with regard to feeling engaged in meaningful events that lead to both understanding how to help your child succeed and how to attain the resources needed to be a meaningful and positive force in our school and surrounding community. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Outreach Event checklists/sign ins and feedback forms Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2  3  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Cut off scores from standardized 2018 NYSexams provided by NYC DOE as well as classroom grades Mathematics Science Cut off scores from standardized 2018NYSexams provided byNYCDOE as well as classroom grades Classroom Grades Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) After school programs are a combination of homework help and IReadyonline instruction. Pull out intervention teachers use data from student assessments such as Performance Series, IReady, and running records to align instructional materials including Leveled Literacy Intervention, Imagine Learning, strategy group lessons and teacher created materials I READY, Reflex Math, ,after school instructional materials, teacher created materials Teacher created materials and strategies, Defined Stem online activities, Discovery Education materials Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) Small group and one on one instruction, online instruction When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Push in and pull out sessions during the school day with small groups of 4 - 8 students, after school program groups average 15 students Small group and one on one instruction, online instruction During the school day, after school program Small group instruction During the school day 4  Social Studies Classroom Grades At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Teacher/parent recommendation Teacher created materials and strategies, guided reading content based titles, Passport to Social Studies activities At risk weekly services Small group instruction During the school day Small group and one on one During the school day 5  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 90 Students are considered STH at this time. 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. We purchase uniform shirts and physical education uniforms for these students. In addition, we provide free school supplies including book bags and free book titles for independent reading. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 6  3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. 7  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. The school has employs 4 staff developers along with one literacy coach and a a ULIT coach. Staff developers mentor new teachers. An intervisitation system is in place so that all teachers can see the practice of others and teachers meet twice weekly for common planning and professional learning team sessions. Teachers are also sent to offsite BFSC workshops relevant to their subject area. An assistant principal in charge of Special Education, 4 additional assistant principals, 7 AIS teahcers,an IEP teacher, one data specialist, 4 SETSS teachers and 5 ENL teachers are available for all teachers, new and veteran, in both buildings. Elementary school teachers have 80 minutes of professional development per week and middle school teachers have 125 minutes of professional development per week. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). Teachers are encouraged to facilitate grade level and school wide weekly professional development oppprtunities.. In addition, many teachers sign up for professional development outside the school building and the school often pays the registration fees. Staff developers are assigned grade bands and subject areas for targeted assistance. Engage NY materials are utilized alongside purchased programs such as Ready Gen, CodeX, Go Math, Passport and Connected Math to ensure tasks, rubrics, assessments, and daily lessons meet rigorous standards. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program 8  Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). Prior to starting kindergarten, preschool students are invited into the school building to complete a pre-entrance assessment and share what they know so they are properly placed in kindergarten. Pre school families are also invited into the school in June prior to the September start of kindergarten for a school orientation and tour. Families are provided with materials and information that stress the importance of reading to your child at home, the need for good attendance, and tips on how to successfully transition children to a full day kindergarten program. Kindergarten students are picked up in their classrooms each afternoon so families have the opportunity to meet with their child's teacher each day for questions and concerns. Teachers also update families at this time to the child's adjustment progress.. 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. Teachers meet weekly to determine relevant assessments and adjust existing unit exams and benchmark assessments. The MOSL committee determines MOSL selections. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Column B Verify with an (X) Section Reference(s) 9  Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 1,150,462 83,584 39,502 0 10,654,447 x x x x 5A, 5B, 5C, 5D, 5A, 5B, 5C, 5D 5B, 5C, 5E 5D, 5E 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another 0  purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 1  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. PS83, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. PS 83 will support parents and families of Title I students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; 2  ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; The school’s Parent Involvement Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA//State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in 3  the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the ESSA; ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) Template School-Parent Compact (SPC) PS 83 , in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic 4  achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; 5  ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities 6  ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; 7  ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 8  Addendum: Community School Partnerships Directions: The Community School (CS) strategy is directly aligned to the Framework for Great Schools. Community Schools bring schools and community partners together and integrate academics, health, youth development, and family engagement to provide students with the tools and opportunities they need to succeed. The Core Services in Community Schools are Expanded Learning Time (ELT), Attendance Supports, Family Engagement, and Health & Wellness. Part 1 – Community School Partnerships Goal(s) How is the CS strategy integrated into academic instruction at your school, and what impact has it had on student academic outcomes? The CS strategy incorporates extended learning time into our school plan. Students have the opportunity after school to receive homework help and to utilize technology they may not otherwise have at home. In addition, students participate in after school Wellness Clubs and family activities such as cooking challenges and fitness challenges at our annual health fair. During the school day, children participate in COOKSHOP, care for our second grade school-community garden or learn in our outdoor classroom setting designed by the Horticultural Society. Indicate the summative goal(s) of the Community School for the 2018-19 school year. Be sure to construct the goal to be SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Realistic, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 100% of students in grades K-4 will have had the opportunity to participate in a minimum of 5 evening Wellness events with their families. By June 2019, a minimum of 150 students will participate in after school Homework Help Clubs. By June 2019, school wide attendance will average 95% or higher. Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Community School Annual Goal(s): How will achieving your Community School Goal(s)--in Expanded Learning Time (ELT), Attendance Supports, Family Engagement, and Health & Wellness--support your academic goals for students? Students who have more opportunities for authentic learning will achieve higher levels on state exams, on classroom assessments and will have wider high school opportunities. Part 2 – Community School Partnerships Core Services Action Plan Part 2a. Identify the Community-based Organization (CBO) partnerships that you will develop in ELT, Attendance Supports, Family Engagement, and Health & Wellness, their target student population(s), and scope of the services provided. As well as supporting schools’ supportive environment and attendance work, CBOs should be helping to support your school’s instructional focus. CBO Partnership Sports and Arts in Schools Target Population Grades 5-8 Scope of Service SY18-19 SMART Goal Afterschool academics, arts, service and leadership activities A minimum of 200 students will participate in the Sports and Arts after school programs by June 2018. Part 3 – Budget and Resource Alignment 9  Part 3a. Indicate resources your Community Partnership will leverage to achieve your summative SMART goal(s) and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Community Partnership funds purchase materials for after school learning opportunities, fund our orchestra for enriched learning experiences, provide emotional support through the Green Generations after school program, and provide student progams during February and Spring break out of school time periods. Part 3b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) X Title I SWP Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside X 21st Century C4E SIG Grant School Achievement X Other Funding Part 3c. Describe how the school will partner with the Lead CBO to do the following: 1. Community Schools are expected to partner with a community-based partner organization (CBO) and together with members of the School Leadership Team, hire a Community School Director. The Director will lead implementation of the asset and needs assessment process, and other critically important coordinating activities. Indicate how you will leverage this aspect of the work. Community Schools are expected to personalize the needs of all students, through strategic programming and services, as determined by the asset and needs assessment, and must also offer Expanded Learning Time (ELT) and mental health programming. In completing this section, ensure that you think about how: (1) the right services are provided to the right students and families at the right time; and (2) how you will seamlessly coordinate services with instructional programming happening throughout and outside of the school day. Indicate how you will implement this work, and describe other programming you anticipate to be in place to strengthen this initiative. Community Schools are expected to emerge as Partnership Schools, which are places where parents and families feel welcome, actively participate in the conversation and decision-making around the renewal of their schools, and have many opportunities to advocate for their children. Monthly meetings and Community School Forums engaging families and community stakeholders will be a critical part of this family engagement strategy. Describe how you will implement this aspect of the work. Community School Principals are expected to meet on a weekly basis with their Community School Director, select Assistant Principals, key staff, and other CBOs, to analyze trends in data and case manage individual students. Data tools – including the New Visions Data Sorter - and training will be available for schools to use. Indicate how you will implement this aspect of the work. 2. 3. 4. Part 4 – Community School Partnerships Oversight Part 4a. Key Staff and Partners 1. Name and describe the scope of involvement of all community partners working in the school (include partners supporting ELT, counseling, enrichment, etc.) 2. Name the members of your Community School Team and how meetings will be organized and structured to engage all stakeholders and be focused on results. 3. Explain data strategies including the use of the data sorter, and steps that the school will take to ensure that the appropriate interventions are provided to the right students Sports and Arts in Schools provides academic, arts and leadership opportunities for middle school students after school. 0  Ultimate Enrichment provides similar opportunities for elementary aged students with sliding scale fees based on need. The Bronx Arts Ensemble provides music instruction after school. The Committee of Interns and Residents provides wellness lessons to students in grade 4. Cookshop provides hands on nutrition lessons in grades 1 and 2. Cookshop for Families convenes each month for family cooking lessons, demonstrations and tastings. The Horticultural Society partners with PS 83 to maintain, improve and facilitate lessons and activities in our elementary school garden. Green Generations provides emotional wellness support in an after school club setting for students in grades 2,3 and 4. In addition, family activities and workshops are planned as part of the program. Our School Wellness Council plans monthly Family Wellness activities on weekends and evenings. Part 4b. Indicate resources needed including human resources, instructional resources, and schedule adjustments to implement the Community School program. Our Wellness Council champions schedule events both during and after school, rearranging student schedules when necessary. Community School funds also provide instructional materials. Part 4c. Timeline for implementation and completion, including start and end dates. Events are scheduled from September 2018 through June 2019. Part 4d. Mental Health Work Plan Separate from this S/CEP, schools will complete a Mental Health Work Plan that will become an addendum to this document. 1  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 2  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: <!--{cke_protected}%3Cmeta%20charset%3D%22utf-8%22%20%2F%3E--> Our school will offer two programs each focusing on Entering and Emerging ELLs and Immigrants. The first program that will be explained is the After-School Program and the second is the Saturday Academy. ELL/Immigrant After-School Academy-Imagine Learning Program Rationale: For our Direct Instruction Supplemental After-School Program, our school has purchased the computer based language and reading development program Imagine Learning reading program. This program builds basic and academic vocabulary and English grammar skills for ELLs/Immigrants as well strengthens memory, attention span, processing and sequencing cognitive skills. The Imagine Learning program supports Immigrant students by providing: -Speech cognition technology that allows students to practice reading aloud and also records and corrects student speech. -Informative texts in content area subjects such as Science and Social Studies are incorporated to build academic vocabulary. -Pre-recorded passages read to students which will familiarize students with proper English pronunciation and inflection of words and sentences. <!--{cke_protected}%3Cmeta%20charset%3D%22utf-8%22%20%2F%3E--> Imagine Learning is an appropriate program for ELL/Immigrant students who are low readers and non-readers alike. This program can also assist students who have been experiencing an English language development delay. Before beginning the program, each child will take as assessment which determines the correct starting point for each student. Students will also be tested after completing a percentage of content in order to compare data of student progress. Each student will benefit from the Imagine Learning Reading program because it can offer each child an individualized and personalized reading program. Subgroups: This program will be offered specifically to Entering and Emerging and Immigrant students in grades 3,4,5,6,7,and 8. These grade bands have been targeted for school support because students in these grades that function on the Entering and Emerging levels as well as Immigrants have been found to have difficulty performing at grade level on the NYS ELA. There will be a total of of 100 students invited to the program. Two ESOL teachers as well a Social Studies and Science teacher will work the program. Each of the teachers will assist 25 students at a time. The Social Studies and Science teacher will rotate through each group to assist with 3  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information direct classroom instruction and assignments. Similar to the general education after school program, this will work as a subject specific tutoring session. Letters inviting the students will be sent home in English and the Parent’s preferred language including Arabic. Albanian, Bengali and Spanish. Schedule and Duration: This program will begin Wednesday November 7th, 2018 and end Thursday May 3rd, 2019. The program will run from 2:30-3:30 p.m. totaling 40 days. Class dates are as follows: November 7,8,14,15,28,29 December 5,6,12,13,19,20 January 2,3,9,10,16,17,23,24,31 February 6,7,13,14,27,28 March 6,7,13,14,27,28 April 4,5,11,12,25 May 2,3 Language of Instruction: The language of instruction used for the ELL/Immigrant After School Program will be English. The Imagine Learning program will primarily use English as its method of communication, however, there is an interactive Multimedia Vocabulary support (built into the software) with Arabic and Spanish translations that can be accessed by students if translation is necessary. Numbers and types of certified teachers : There will be two licensed and certified ESOL teachers working the program.They will be assisted by three Content Area teachers. Two Social Studies and one Science Teacher. All teachers will be trained to use the Imagine Learning program by the company. This training includes how to prepare, pre-test and assist students to use the program, monitor student progress and collect, study and compare student progress data. This data will also be shared with classroom teachers at curriculum meetings in order to assist teachers in differentiating their lessons for ELL students within their classrooms. Types of Materials: -laptops and I-pads provided by the school’s technology department -Imagine Learning Software -two consultation meeting with a representative from Imagine Learning -printer paper to print out student data -binder to keep student data -Attendance will be kept on a monthly basis and maintained in the ENL offices in the Main Building and the Annex as well as on Google Drive. <!--{cke_protected}%3Cmeta%20charset%3D%22utf-8%22%20%2F%3E--> Saturday Academy Rationale: We will offer our Entering through Emerging/Immigrant Students in grades 3 through 8 the opportunity to enhance their skills in the content areas to help increase the development of their English skills in the four strands listening, speaking, reading and writing. We will also focus on developing students’ math skills as we have analyzed the results of the 2018 Spring Math test and realized that our students need additional help in this area. 4  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information These grade bands have been specifically chosen according to our data which indicates that Entering and Emerging students in grades 3-8 which indicates that students in the upper grades functioning on these levels have a larger learning gap in all areas of instruction. The focus of the program is to develop content area knowledge, fluency, grammar and writing skills in our ELLs as well as math skills. Subgroups: The subgroups to be formed in this program include grades 3rd-4th grade,5th grade,6th grade, and 7-8th grade.A total of 100 students will be invited to the program. Each class will consist of twenty five students in the Entering to Emerging Levels and instruction will take place in the Annex. All letters inviting students and further communication to parents will be sent home in the Parent’s preferred language choice which include Arabic, Albanian, Bengali and Spanish. Monthly attendance for this program will be maintained in the Main Building ENL/Office Office and on Google Drive. A portfolio will be maintained for each student with the work that they completed during the program. These portfolios will be housed in the Annex and Main Building ENL Offices. Schedule and Duration: The program will take place Saturdays from November 10, 2018-June 15, 2019 with the exception of November 24, December 22,29, January 19, February 16, 23, April 20, May 25. The total number of Saturdays is 26. The program will operate from 9 a.m.-12 p.m. Language of Instruction: The program will take place in English as the the students are in an ENL program. Number and types of certified teachers: There will be five teachers in the program. One teacher is a Certified ESOL teacher and the other four teachers are Content Area Certified in Math. The ESOL teacher will teach Fluency, Grammar and Writing to all grade levels. The other teachers will teach math to the students and manage the Imagine Learning Program for their group of students. Classes will be situated in rooms next to each other to allow classes to travel between the teachers. The Math teachers will meet with the ESOL teacher weekly for one half an hour for planning to infuse their teaching with ELL strategies and to provide language support for classroom lessons. Types of Materials: -The Imagine Learning Computer based program -Central Math by Houghton Mifflin a vocabulary based Math Program -Longman ESL Literacy Third Edition which provides a basic introduction to English Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration 5  Part C: Professional Development topics to be covered   name of provider Begin description here: Part C: Professional Development <!--{cke_protected}%3Cmeta%20charset%3D%22utf-8%22%20%2F%3E--> The school will offer monthly professional development for teachers of ELLs and Immigrants. This training is designed to help teachers develop strategies to assist their ELLs and help integrate them into classroom activities. The strategies we will use are from the website Colorin Colorado.The teachers that will receive this training will include all teachers in the school that have ELLs in their classroom. October 29th-Lesson Planning for ELLs and Immigrants 2;30-3:45 providers Ms. Roos and Ms. Stinga November 5th-Scaffolding Instruction for ELLs and Immigrants 2:30-3:45 providers Ms. Hartofilis and Mr. McCormack December 3rd-The Role of Background Knowledge 2:30-3:45 provider Ms. Mandas January 7th- Differentiation for Entering and Emerging ELLs and Immigrants 2:30-3:45 Ms. Roos and Ms. Stinga February 4th-How to Informally Assess ELLs and Immigrants 2:30-3:45 providers Ms. Hartofilis and Mr. McCormack March 4th-Peer Learning and ELLs and Immigrants 2:30-3:45 Ms. Roos and Ms. Stinga May 6th-Review of ELL and Immigrant Data collected during the year-Teachers of ELLs 2:30-3:45 Ms Hartofilis and Mr. McCormack June 17th- Using Data to explain how we will drive instruction for Fall 2019- Teachers of ELLs 2:30-3:45 PD will be provided by the ENL teachers Ms. Stinga, Ms. Roos, Ms. Mandas, Ms. Hartofilis and Mr. McCormack. Records for the professional development will be maintained in the ENL offices in the Annex and in the Main Buildings and on Google Drive. 6  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: <!--{cke_protected}%3Cmeta%20charset%3D%22utf-8%22%20%2F%3E--> Parent Engagement Begin description here: Our school will offer an Adult After School ENL Program for ELL and Immigrant parents. This program is designed for adults that have little to no prior school experience. It will offer a basic introduction to English. Students will attain the fundamental literacy skills and basic communication skills needed to participate successfully in school, in the workplace, in the community and in real-life situations. Schedule and duration:This program will begin Wednesday November 7th, 2018 and end Thursday May 3rd, 2019. The program will run from 2:30-3:30 p.m. totaling 40 days. Class dates are as follows: November 7,8,14,15,28,29 December 5,6,12,13,19,20 January 2,3,9,10,16,17,23,24,31 February 6,7,13,14,27,28 March 6,7,13,14,27,28 April 4,5,11,12,25 May 2,3 Topics to be covered: -The Alphabet -Numbers -School -Time -The Calendar -Money -The Family -Food -Health -Work Name of the Provider: This course will be taught by Ms. Elaine Mandas and ESOL Certified teacher Parents will be notified by a letter sent home in their preferred language inviting them to the program. Languages include Arabic, Albanian, Bengali and Spanish. 7 Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. / Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits) /  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL / / / / / / / / / / / / 8  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 11 School Name The Donald Hertz School Borough Bronx School Number 083 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Brandon Muccino Coach Rosemary Mecora ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Linda Stinga/ENL Teacher Teacher/Subject Area Kristy Falotico/AIS Teacher/Subject Area Katie McGlynn/2 nd grade Related-Service Provider Cathy Lloyd Superintendent Meisha Ross-Porter Assistant Principal Jennifer Lana- Etzel Coach Linda Collins School Counselor Stephanie Loretta Parent PTA president-Jasmine Flores Parent Coordinator Ann Daly Field Support Center Staff Member Christy Dela Cruz Other (Name and Title) Lisa Schwartz/2 nd Grade C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 2 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 5 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics 9  Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 1685 Total number of ELLs 330 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 19.58% Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 1 2 K 0 0 0 0 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 4 0 0 0 0 3 0 0 0 0 5 0 0 0 0 6 0 0 0 0 7 0 0 0 0 8 0 0 0 0 9 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? For the 2017-18 school year we will use Fountas and Pinnell to assess the reading levels of ELL students in our school four times a year. We also use IReady to assess reading levels. These assessments show that our Entering ELLS read on a Pre-Kindergarten Level on all grade levels. Emergent ELLs in grades K-2 read on a Kindergarten to first grade level. Emergent ELLs in grades 3-8 read on a Kindergarten to second grade level. Transitioning ELLs in grades K-2 read on a first grade level. In grades 3-8 we will use the Performance Series to evaluate the Reading Progress of our students.Transitioning ELLs in grades 3-8 read on a first to second grade level. Advanced ELLs in grades K-2 read on grade level or one grade level below. Advanced ELLs in grades 3-8 read on second to sixth grade level. ELL students show marginal growth in their reading level throughout the year and most show gains of .5 of a grade level in their reading by the completion of a grade. Our long term ELLs and SWD-ELLs show .25 of grade level growth in their reading by the completion of a grade. This data shows that ELLs in grades K-2 are able 0  to read more closely to grade level common core standards while, ELLs in grades 3-8 have a wide gap in most cases between their reading level and the common core standard reading level for their grade. Students will be using Iready to further secure their reading skills two times a week. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? Our school has developed an instructional plan to offer guided reading instruction to our ELL students on their current reading level to accelerate the reading levels of ELL students. This instruction will occur within the ELA classroom 1 to 2 periods a week. Teachers will work with a small group of students in their classroom using guided reading books to facilitate learning. Media carts are available to classroom teachers to support the use of IReady in the classroom. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? We evaluate the success of our ENL program by using the EDAT. This tool allows us to see how each ELL has progressed. We also reference data on how ELLs meet their AYP. Our school uses the the Reach ESL Program. We administer Benchmark Assesments in fluency two times during the school year in the winter and spring. Additionally, rubrics are used to assess students oral language, writing and portfolio assessments throughout the year.Unit tests are administered upon the completion of each unit throughout the school year. Finally, we use Fountas and Pinnell reading levels to evaluate the reading progress of our students. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? ELL students who score below targeted performance levels on the NYSESLAT in grades K-2 and the NYSELAT and the ELA and Math NYS tests in grades 3-5 are considered for further support services. These services when provided are aligned to our school intervention plan. Students are given small group intervention service in ELA or Math according to their needs.These programs will target the specific areas of instruction the students need based on the data found. We also reference data on ELLs. Modalities of strength found on the EDAT are found and established baseline progress. We have two supplemental Title III programs that we have implemented based on our data. One is the Imagine learning After School Program which meets Wednesday and Thursdays from 2;30-3;30 from November 15-March 21, 2018. The ELL Saturday Academy which meets 9-11 from November 18-March 31, 2018. In each of these programs Entering and Emerging ELLs have been targeted due to the large numbers that we take in each year. Grades 3-8 have been invited to these programs to help accelerate their learning of English. Students in the Imagine Learning After School Program will learn language literacy skills through the program as will as work with students to teach vocabulary through content area instruction to provide a framework to learn in. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] ELL students who score below targeted performance levels on the NYSESLAT in grades K-2 and the NYSELAT and the ELA in grades 3-5 are considered for further support services. These services when provided are aligned to our school intervention plan. Students are considered based on the following criteria:1. The number of years they have been in the ENL program with preference being given to students who have been in the program for three or more years.2. SIFE students who needs additional academic support will be given preference for additional services3. Long-term ELLs will be given a preference for additional services4. ENL/ESL teacher recommendation5. Content teacher recommendation6.NYSESLAT results7. Parent or guardian request8.. Samples of student work in English and the Home Language will be carefully reviewed Our school uses the RTI process to refer students to receive an evaluation. Careful consideration is given when we refer an ELL student. We follow guidelines to ensure that in general no ELL students are referred before two years of ENL service. Students who go through the RTI process are evaluated informally and formally in grades 3-8. These results are used to provide data to base the RTI referral on. Our school uses assessment data with AIS to form instruction that is clearly aligned to the specific needs of the students receiving these services. We implement the RTI framework by identifying potential students. A meeting is conducted including the RTI team which includes a School Psychologist, Teacher, ENL Teacher, AIS Teacher and Parent. Students are assessed using Fontes and Pinnel and IReady in both Reading and Math. If needed and possible, they are also assessed in their first language. If a student is found to have a two year or more deficit in their learning AIS services are 1  reccomended. If a student qualifies for AIS, the AIS provided will use IReady results for both Reading and Math to guide their instruction. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. The EDAT reveals that are students did overwhelmingly well on the NYSESLAT. The majority of our students showed an increase in their scores particularly in grades three and four. Areas of concern are our SWD ELLS. These students have difficulty making movement from the level that they are on to the next. We plan to focus on these students and help them develop skills in reading and writing to enable them to make the gains they need. The data reveals that Entering level ELL students need to improve in all four language strands.Emerging and Transitioning level ELLs need to improve in the areas of Reading and Writing and Expanding level ELLs need to improve in the area of Writing. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? Students are placed in appropriate classes, teachers are made aware and Instruction for ELLs will be delivered in the ESL/ENL Program Model. The model that we use is a Push-In, Pull-Out Model. Students are grouped in classrooms in multilevel ELL levels. ENL Push-In is given to Expanding and Transitioning students to these classrooms to provide service during content area instruction. Entering and Emerging ELLs are seen in a Push-In and Pull-Out Service Model. Push-In Service is provided during content area instruction. We try to align Push-In to Social Studies and Science Instructional times. Each year we review assessments of the ELL students to determine how we need to adjustments to our program. We use the EDAT to Disseminate information about the progressd of our ELLs This information is shared with the ENL/ELL teachers at a Bimonthly Meetings as needed. Benchmark progress is evaluated and shared with ENL/ESL teachers as it is available. Changes that need to be made will be discussed and implemented. I program changes need to be made they will be made in a timely manner. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. Instruction for ELLs will be delivered in the ESL/ENL Program Model. After reviewing NYSTIELL and NYSESLAT test results we place newly enrolled ELLs into classes based on their reading levels. Entering (EN), Emerging (EM), Transitioning (TR), Emerging (EM) and Commanding (CM). There are two components to this program the standalone ENL units and the Integrated ENL units. Our school has chosen to implement the Collaborative Teaching Model for the Integrated ENL units. ELLs have been grouped in three classes per grade in all grades except 3rd which has a population of 44 ELLs that have been placed in four classes. The students have been grouped heterogeneously by proficiency levels withEntering, Emerging and Transitioning students placed in one class Expanding and Commanding Students were grouped in the second and third classes with Entering students to help support them in the transition to English. The ESL Teachers Ms. Stinga, Ms E. Mandas, Ms.M. Mandas, Mr. McCormack and Ms. Roos will provide Integrated Push-in ELA/ENL service in these classrooms for the mandated amount of minutes. Stand Alone ENL Service will be provided in the ESL rooms of Ms. M Mandas for grades 5th -7th , Ms. Stinga K-1st , Ms.E. Mandas for grades 3-4th , Mr. McCormack for grades 7-8th and Ms. Roos 2-3rd . Entering and Emergent students will receive Stand Alone ENL for the mandated minutes in one grade level group. Self-Contained Special Education ELLs will receive Integrated ENL/ELA through the Collaborative Teaching Model and in some cases may be Pulled-Out for 2  Integrated ENL/ELA by a dually licensed ESL/Content Area/Common Branch Licensed teacher, Ms. Stinga K-6 or Ms. Roos 7-8. b. TBE program. If applicable. At the current time we do not have a TBE program due to not having enough students who speak the same language on a grade level. We will monitor our intake of ELL students this year monthly and if sufficient numbers of students do arise we will comply with the Aspira Consent Decree. c. DL program. If applicable. At the current time we do not have a DL program due to lack of parent interest. We will monitor our Parent Survey and Program Selection Forms for an increase in parent choice of DL programs and offer a DL program if our Parent Choice supports it. 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? Ms. Stinga is responsible for ensuring that the mandated number of instructional minutes are provided according to students’ proficiency levels. For next year, ELL students have been grouped in three classes in all grades and four classes in grade three to facilitate the Integrated ENL/ELA units. All ESL/ENL teacher Schedules are kept on file in Ms. Stinga’s office and reviewed monthly to make revisions as necessary due to incoming enrollment. In the event of a large increase of ELLs, the Principal will be notified of the need for additional ENL service providers.2a. Ms. Stinga has planned the ENL units of study to simplify scheduling for our ESL/ENL teachers. Entering and Emerging students will receive 1unit of Stand-Alone ENL Instruction. Entering, Emerging, Transitioning and Expanding students will receive 1 unit of Integrated ENL/ELA service through the Push-In Collaborative Teaching Model for ELA. Commanding ELLs have been placed in ELL classes and will receive .5 units of Integrated ENL/ELA .5 units a week. ELLs placed in Self-Contained Special Education classes will receive 1 unit of Integrated ENL/ELA in either a Push-In Collaborative setting or a Pull-Out setting with a dually licensed ESL/Content/Common Branch Teacher Ms. Stinga K-6 and Ms. Roos 7-8 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. The Stand-Alone ENL program will provide instruction in literacy specifically Listening, Speaking, Reading and Writing that will be aligned with the ELA classroom instruction and also provide students with the academic language, vocabulary and content found in texts to be read in the classroom. Literacy instruction will be built around Guiding Questions that are interesting and complex to encourage higher level thinking skills including close reading and developing an argument. Multicultural themes will be embedded in these lessons to engage ELL students and provide a connection to their culture and experiences. Students will engage in word study and morphemic analysis to broaden their academic vocabulary. Additionally, students will focus on phonics and reading fluency so that they can easily navigate new texts. Lessons will be delivered using the SIOP model. Teachers plan for a language objective in each lesson and scaffolds are built into the lesson to support our ELLs. Strategies that we use include front loading vocabulary, vocabulary translations in the native language, building background, rereading, teacher modeling, student pairs, small group work, graphic organizers and the development of academic conversations. Finally, students will be assessed formally and informally. The informal assessment is given so that teachers can plan for their students’ academic needs. The Collaborative Teaching Integrated ENL/ELA Program will foster a partnership between the ELA classroom teacher and the ENL teacher to help ELL students meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. The ELA teacher will plan for the content area lesson and the ENL teacher will provide the linguistic support for the ELL students in that classroom. The ENL teachers will infuse the content area with SIOP strategies including incorporating a language objective, building background, native language vocabulary translation, front loading vocabulary, rereading, paraphrasing, sentence stems, graphic organizers, teacher modeling, the development of meaningful academic conversations and teaching transition words to help students organize their writing as well as rubrics. Assessments will be designed to allow all ELLs to be evaluated. 3  4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? Students who speak Spanish are given the Spanish LAB. This test determines their level of understanding in Spanish. We also give the NYS test in Translated Languages of our students when they are available. Since our school currently only offers an ESL/ENL Program, we do evaluate students in other languages. If a need arises throughout the year to evaluate an ELL in their native language, we will contact the ELL Compliance Leader to find appropriate materials to evaluate the student. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status After the student has been determined that they are SIFE using the MLS Multilingual Literacy Screener. a. Differentiation for SIFE students requires instruction in concepts learned at least two years prior to the grade that the student is currently placed in. Our ENL Teachers look at the Common Core Standards for the grade that the students are currently in and plan an instructional program for these students that will bridge the gaps that they will have. By looking closely at the two previous grades of instruction in the areas of ELA and Math we can locate areas of instructional emphasis that will help support the students in their learning. By teaching prior skills along with grade level content, the students are better equipped to keep up with the demands of grade level instruction. Bilingual glossaries in all content areas will be used as well as the teaching of cognates. b. Newcomer ELLs require a great deal of native language vocabulary translation in the content areas. This is provided by the use of bilingual glossaries, Picture Dictionaries and the teaching of cognates in content areas or Bilingual translation lists created by ENL teachers specific to content being taught. Front loading vocabulary, building background and the use of graphic organizers and paraphrasing are strategies that we use which are essential to the success of these students. Connecting what is learned to students’ home cultures is also a strategy we implement. When available, these students are assigned a native language speaking buddy/translator. Differentiating assessments by using graphic organizers, paraphrasing the text and modifying assessments according to ELL student level enables the teachers to track growth in students.c. Developing ELLs have a beginning foundation in English Language skills that can support them in the content areas. At this level we focus on building background and increasing students’ academic vocabulary through word study, morphemic analysis and reading comprehension strategy instruction. We also work with students to build fluency and automaticity when reading so that they will be able to quickly navigate longer texts. Since Developing ELLs have strong oral language skills we focus on embedding academic language in their discussions by using sentence stems. Students are taught to specifically use academic words in their writing and to use transitions to help frame their sentences. Rubrics are used to assess students in all four language strands. Students are also responsible for self-assessment.d. Long Term ELLs have mastered the listening and speaking of English. They have deficits in academic vocabulary that impedes their learning. These students are performing at least two years behind grade level in the areas of reading and writing. To support growth in these students we focus heavily on the development of academic vocabulary in the content areas. Vocabulary is front loaded for these students in content area lessons. Background is built to connect students to the subject they will be learning. Word study and morphemic analysis is also taught routinely. Students are responsible for using this vocabulary orally through the use of sentence stems and during peer conversations. Reading Fluency skills are also addressed through repeated readings of text and focusing on automaticity to develop reading speed to help these students improve their reading rate. Teacher modeling of writing assignments and the use of rubrics helps students become responsible for their own work. The use of academic vocabulary is infused throughout all four language modalities.e. Former ELLs will receive .5 units of Integrated ENL/ELA which will be delivered in the Collaborative Teaching Model. These students have a firm grasp of the English Language however; they may need support in the areas of academic vocabulary, reading comprehension and writing. To support these students, the ENL teacher will front load academic vocabulary that students may have difficulty with during ELA lessons. Word study and morphemic analysis will continue to be used when necessary. Reading strategies to encourage close reading of text and paraphrasing will be incorporated into lessons. Teacher modeling of writing assignments will assist students with these tasks. Providing lists of academic words and transition words to support their writing will help to improve student writing quality. Rubrics will be used to help students become responsible for their own learning. 4  6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? Our ENL teachers use the SIOP Model when teaching ELL-SWD. SIOP strategies include, building background, creating comprehensible input, front loading vocabulary, use of bilingual glossaries, integration of all four language strands listening, speaking, reading and writing into the lesson, teaching of specific skills strategically are used and teacher modeling. 90% of the lesson is student engaged involving partners and small group work, and exit slips to assess students learning. The grade level material that we have available to our students is the Reach Program published by Cengage/National Geographic for grades K-8 and the Keystone Series by Pearson for Transitioning and Advanced students in grades 6-8. These programs use the SIOP Model to allow these ELLs to learn academic vocabulary and offer access to academic content supported by visuals and background knowledge to create comprehensible input for these students. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? ENL teachers and classroom teachers will review ELL SWD IEP and Language Acqusitions Goals as well as any and or all other services (eg. SETTs, Speech, Counseling, Occupational and or Phusical Therapy) before collaboratively planning flexible schedules for students. ELL-SWDs will receive Collaborative ENL/ELA Instruction in their classrooms. The ENL teacher will provide accelerated language acquisition and support in the four language strands: listening, speaking, reading and writing for ELA lessons and may choose to use grade level ENL resources to supplement the curriculum being taught. ENL teachers will also bridge the curriculum to the students’ culture and provide background knowledge when necessary. Lessons will follow the SIOP Model. All service will be scheduled during Science or Social Studies instruction to support the learning of the Common Core Standards. ENL teachers will consult student IEPs and Special Education teachers to address the needs of ELL-SWDs. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. ELL students will receive targeted intervention programs in ELA and Math. Our school uses the iReady Program to target all ELL students. Students use the program once a week in their classrooms. They can also access iReady at home. This program provides individualized instruction for students by determining the students' levels of proficiency in ELA and Math. Lessons are designed for each student at their own personal level. Students will also receive after school and saturday school programs under Title III. The after school program will use the FastForWord program and online reading program that is used to accelerate students reading. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? For the 2017-18 school year we are interested in purchasing a Computer Based Programs to support out Entering and Emerging ELL population which also provides data on student progress. We are interested in the Essential Skills web based program. This program helps students develop basic skills in English. We would like to continue the use of the Fast Forward Program for grades 3-8 which offers leveled instruction in English using a brain based proven intervention for literacy. The data collected from these programs will be used to drive lesson instruction. As our program moves to the Integrated ENL/ELA Push-In Model, we will purchase materials and trade books on appropriate reading levels that support the Ready Gen and Code X themes students will be working on. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? Paste response to question here: Currently, no programs will be discontinued. In the event that we need to discontinue a program, Ms. Stinga will meet with the Principal, Mr. Muccino to develop a plan to support our ELL students. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. In our school, ELLs are placed in general education classes to allow them to have access to native speakers and the grade level content. ELL students who meet the requirements are also considered for advanced placement classes in eighth grade. All school programs are offered to our ELL students. Letters informing parents of after school programs such as Imagine Learning are sent home in the preferred parent language to ensure that our ELL students have the same opportunity as other students. 5  The afterschool and Saturday ELL plann offer students access to the Imagine Learning computer program as well guided classroom Instruction by licenced pedogoges in the four main content areas: ELA, Math, Science and Social Studies. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. The instructional materials that we use to support our ELLs are the Reach Program in grades K-4 for all level ELLs and the Inside Program grades 5-8 by National Geographic Learning for Entering and Emerging ELLs. These programs follow the SIOP Model and focus on students demonstrating comprehension through reading, writing, and discussion. Rich academic language is incorporated into these programs to accelerate students’ vocabulary. Content in these programs is designed to represent the linguistic and cultural diversity of our ELLs. Assessment of students on a daily and unit completion basis helps to guide instruction. Reach also offers a technology component. Teachers can access the National Geographic Website. Content videos associated with the text can be downloaded for viewing with students.In addition, classroom teachers of Entering and Emerging ENL students from grades K-8 also have daily access to use the Imagine Learning Computer Program as supplementary language learning assistance. These programs are used during ELA periods. Reach Phonics kits are used with Entering and Emerging ELLs grades K-4 to strengthen their phonemic awareness skills. Transitioning and Advanced students in grades 6-8 are supported by the Keystone Program by Pearson. This program also uses the SIOP Model of instruction. There is a strong emphasis on building background, front loading vocabulary, reading comprehension strategy instruction and writing process instruction. The content is culturally diverse to appeal to our ELLs. Assessments are also incorporated to evaluate students and see next steps for learning. The technology programs that our ELLs use are Raz Kids grades K-2 and Entering students in grades 3-8 and iReady in grades K-8 . The Raz Kids program has access to leveled books for students to listen to and read in English. The iReady program is designed to be a personal tutor for each student. After an initial assessment, students work on their own level in the areas of Reading and or Math. Mastery reports are generated to determine areas that need remediation.The Fast Forward web based program is also used with Entering and Emerging ELLs in grades 3-8. Students were exposed to learning to read using this brain based reading program. Reports were generated to monitor student progress. Assessments were given periodically to measure student growth. Bilingual dictionaries and Content area language glossaries are used to support Entering, Emerging and Transitioning and Advanced ELLs in the core content areas. As we move forward with our Integrated ENL/ELA Model we will look carefully at out our programs to find lessons that are aligned to the core curriculum in ELA for each specific grade level and incorporate them into differentiated lessons for our students. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? At the current time we do not offer a DL or TBE program. Home Language support for these programs will be determined as the need for them arises. Within the ENL Program we offer Home Language support through the use of Bilingual dictionaries, Picture Dictionaries and Content Area Glossaries purcharsed as well as provided by the State. ENL teachers also provide Home Language support through translation of academic vocabulary and the teaching of cognates. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. Ms. Stinga, the ENL Coordinator is responsible for ensuring that students receive the required services and resources. Ms. Stinga maintains a file of all ENL Teacher Schedules in her office. She is involved with organizing the schedule for the ENL Program .Mr. Muccino will ensure that ELL students who qualify for AIS Services due to their performance on the 2017 ELA and Math State tests will receive these services from a grade level AIS provider. Resources are prepared by Ms. Stinga and other ENL teachers that service the students. Bilingual Dictionaries and Picture Dictionaries grade and age appropriate, are distributed to Entering, Emerging and Transitioning ELLs in grades K-3 as well as Content Area Glossaries to all ELLs for grades 3-4 by Ms. Mandas in the Main Building and Ms. Stinga and Ms. Mandas and Ms. Roos in the Annex. Ms. M. Mandas in the Main Building distributes grade and age appropriate Bilingual Dictionaries and Picture Dictionaries to Entering, Emerging and Transitioning ELLs and Content Area Glossaries to all ELLs in grades 5-8. A list of students who receive these resources in grades K-8 is maintained in Ms. Stinga’s office. Grade Level Content area glossaries are given to classroom teachers of ELLs at the start of the school year. As new students are admitted, materials will be supplied as needed. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? All of the following resources for grades K-4 our housed at 1840 Bogart Ave. Annex, room 222. The materials for grades 5-8 our housed in 950 Rhinelander Ave., room 265. Teachers and students have access to laptops and landline computers in both 6  buildings. The instructional materials that we use to support our ELLs are the Reach Program in grades K-4 for all level ELLs and the Inside Program grades 5-8 by National Geographic Learning for Entering and Emerging ELLs. These programs follow the SIOP Model and focus on students demonstrating comprehension through reading, writing, and discussion. Rich academic language is incorporated into these programs to accelerate students’ vocabulary. Content in these programs is designed to represent the linguistic and cultural diversity of our ELLs. Assessment of students on a daily and unit completion basis helps to guide instruction. Reach Phonics kits are used with Entering and Emerging ELLs grades K-4 to strengthen their phonemic awareness skills. Transitioning and Advanced students in grades 6-8 are supported by the Keystone Program by Pearson. This program also uses the SIOP Model of instruction. There is a strong emphasis on building background, front loading vocabulary, reading comprehension strategy instruction and writing process instruction. The content is culturally diverse to appeal to our ELLs. Assessments are also incorporated to evaluate students and see next steps for learning. The technology program that all ELLs use is the iReady Program. This program is designed to be a personal tutor for each student. After an initial assessment, students work on their own level in the areas of Reading and or Math. Mastery reports are generated to determine areas that need remediation. Bilingual dictionaries and Content area language glossaries are used to support Entering, Emerging and Transitioning and Advanced ELLs in the core content areas. As we move forward with our Integrated ENL/ELA Model we will look carefully at out our programs to find lessons that are aligned to the core curriculum in ELA for each specific grade level and incorporate them into differentiated lessons for our students. K-4 curriculum materials and programs are housed in the annex and 5-8 materials are housed in the main building.Teachers in both buildings have access to laptop carts so students can access technology when needed. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). Newly enrolled ELLs are invited to the school for a parent and child interview with Ms. Stinga ENL Coordinator, Ms. Mandas or Ms. Roos the ENL teachers before the start of the next school year to determine if the child needs to be administered the NYSITELL. At this meeting parents are given a list in their preferred language of communication of community and web based resources as well as suggested books and or workbooks available to help their child gain experience in their development of English Language and core content area skills. Parents are also informed about After School and Saturday School Programs that the school offers throughout the year which include the ELL After School Program. During the school day students will attend not only their regularly school scheduled classes but also be serviced by and ENL provider within the classroom for 180 minutes and 180 pull-out in a separate location. Students will also use Essentials Skills a web based computer program which assists students develop BICS, communication skill for Entering or Emerging level students. A Guidance Counselor Deans and Assistant Principals are helpful for providing any cultural transitioning. needs or questions. The translation and Interpretation Unit can be used as a way for us to communicate with parents during conferences with parents. The Parent Coordinator, Anne Daly informs and acts as a liaison to the parents. She connects with the community as well informs them of workshops and cultural events within our area. Translation services will also be provided by the Translation and Interpretation Unit and or a staff member who speaks the home language of the parent. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? Our school offers a Spanish Culture/Language Program to ELL students. This program offers our Spanish speaking ELLs the opportunity to share experiences from their culture and language. It provides the opportunity for our ELLs from non-Spanish speaking cultures to experience learning about a new culture and language. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? 7  d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? Paste response to question here: At the current time we do not offer a DL program however, a program will be created if we see a parent desire for this program from the Program Selection Surveys. Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? The Professional Development plan for ENL, All other Classroom and Content Area teachers of ELLs and Non-Pedagogical Staff will be a series of workshops that will take place over the course of the 2017-2018 school year and each session will run 60 minutes two Mondays of each month from September 2017 to March 2018. All attendees will sign in at the beginning of each workshop and feedback sheets will be collected at the end. ENL teachers will provide themselves with their own professional development plan. ENL teachers will also create and provide ELL professional development for all Classroom and Content Area teachers of ELLs. Paste response to question here: 2. Professional Development will be provided to ENL and Teachers of ELLs according to the following schedule of dates and topics to be covered: 9/18/17-ENL Teachers-Examining Spring 2017 NYSESLAT Results-Teachers will examine test results to align instruction for ELLs, record student progress. Live Binders toolkit-Using NYSESLAT Data to Target Instruction for ELLs by Dr. B Moro9/25/17-All Teachers- Chapter 2 The ESL/ELL Teacher's Survival Guide by Larry Ferlazzo and Katie Hull Syupnieski, ESL Classroom Basics: Building a Positive and Effective Learning Environment. Reading Rockets Web video-Interactive reading of a story. Teachers will learn effective practices for creating a welcoming environment for ELLs.10/2/17-All Teachers of ELLs- Chapter 3 The ESL/ELL Teacher's Survival Guide by Larry Ferlazzo and Katie Hull Syupnieski, Key Elements of Curriculum for Beginning ELLs. Teachers will be introduced to key learning and teaching strategies that will be regularly used in a classroom with Beginner ELLs. Part I will focus on Reading and Writing strategies. 10/16/17-All Teachers of ELLs- Book Study Chapter 3 The ESL/ELL Teacher's Survival Guide by Larry Ferlazzo and Katie Hull Syupnieski, Key Elements of Curriculum for Beginning ELLs. Part 2 will focus on Speaking and Listening Strategies10/23/17-All Teachers of ELLs- Book Study Chapter 3 The ESL/ELL Teacher's Survival Guide by Larry Ferlazzo and Katie Hull Syupnieski, Key Elements of Curriculum for Beginning ELLs. Using the Tech Tools presented in the Book such as phonics practice, online TPR, Music sites and Online Dialogues.10/30/17- All Teachers of ELLs-Book Study Chapter 4 The ESL/ELL Teacher's Survival Guide by Larry Ferlazzo and Katie Hull Syupnieski, Year Long Schedule. Teachers will learn how to create meaningul conceptual frameworks for ELL year long Thematic scheduling. 11/7/17-ENL Teachers-Book study Sounds Easy! by, Sharron Bassano. Teachers will familiarize themselves with the phonics strategies used with 5-8th grade. 11/20/17-All Teachers of ELLs-Book Study Chapter 5, The ESL/ELL Teacher's Survival Guide by Larry Ferlazzo and Katie Hull Syupnieski, Key Elements of a Curriculum for Intermediate ELLs. Teachers will define the differences between teaching Beginner ELLs and Intermediate ELLs and examine the change of instructional shifts between the two. 11/27/17-All Teachers of ELLs-Book Study Chapter 5, The ESL/ELL Teacher's Survival Guide by Larry Ferlazzo and Katie Hull Syupnieski, Key Elements of a Curriculum for Intermediate ELLs. Teachers will study the researched based and highly effective instructional straegies of this chapter with a focus on promoting analytical and academic writing skills for Intermediate ELLs. 12/4/17-All Teachers of ELLs-Book Study Chapter 6, The ESL/ELL Teacher's Survival Guide by Larry Ferlazzo and Katie Hull Syupnieski, Daily Instruction for Intermediate ELLs. Teachers will learn to incorporate using Problem-Solution Writing Prompts, Cloze Exercises, and Word Charts to build background knowledge and Academic language (pages 156-165). 12/11/17-All Teachers of ELLs- Book Study Chapter 6 p. 180-202. The ESL/ELL Teacher's Survival Guide by Larry Ferlazzo and Katie Hull Syupnieski, Daily Instruction for Intermediate ELLs. Teachers will examine a sample week in a Two-Period Intermediate ESL Class. Teachers will then work in grade level groups to create their own sample week lessons for Intermediate ELLs. 12/18/17-ENL Teachers-Book Study Chapter 11, The ESL/ELL Teacher's Survival Guide by Larry Ferlazzo and Katie Hull Syupnieski, Using Learning Games in the ESL Classroom. Teachers will examine the qualities of a "good" learning game and learn to use objects already available to them for producing effective classroom games for ELLs. 1/08/18-ENL Teachers-Book Study Chapter 12, The ESL/ELL Teacher's Survival Guide by Larry Ferlazzo and Katie Hull 8  Syupnieski,Handling Potential Challenges. Teachers will discuss the challenges of self-motivation and compose a list of positive classroom conditions which can be applied in ENL and mainstream classrooms with ELLs. 1/22/18- ENL Teachers- Book Study Chapter 13, The ESL/ENL Teacher's Survival Guide by Larry Ferlazzo and Katie Hull Syupnieski, Assessing English Language Learners. Teachers will review the key principles of assessing ELLs with focus on the differences between being data informed vs. data-driven teachers and how data can positively or negatively impact learning for ELLs. 2/05/18- ENL Teachers- NYSESLAT Training .Teachers will dicuss how to prepare students for the upcoming exam. 3/26/18-ENL Teachers- NYSESLAT Training. Teachers will review contents of Speaking exam and practice with exemplars sent from Metritech. 4/30/18-ENL Teachers-NYSESLAT Training. Teachers will practice scoring for the Wrting portion of the exam with the training sets sent from Metritech. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. The support that we provide our staff to assist ELLs as they transition from Elementary to Middle School is provided through training and data. Classroom Teachers of ELLs will attend a PD given by the ENL Teachers to address progression levels of ELLs and how to differentiate the Common Core Curriculum for these students at the Middle School level. Teachers of ELLs will also receive a list of the ELL students in their class with their performance levels on the 2017 NYSESLAT and the number of years they have been in the program as well as any other pertinent information about the child. This will provide the required 15% ELL Specific professional development for all teachers as per CR Part 154.2 The date of the PD is 9/7/17. The PD Entitled ELL Descriptors and Differentiation will focus on teachers aligning the ELL students in their class to the WIDA Descriptors and learning how to differentiate for these descriptors in the content areas. Materials to be used are WIDA Descriptors grades 3-5 and 6-8 and WIDA Focus on Differentiation Part I, May 2012 WIDA Consortium. Paste response to question here: Our school makes sure that the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154 are met for teachers of ELLs and ENL teachers by coordinating Monday Afternoon and Staff Development Day PD with Mr. Muccino, the Principal and all coaches and staff developers in our school who all receive the ELL PD calendar before the start of the next school year. PD was specifically aligned to the new requirements of CR Part 154 to assure complete compliance. All attendance rosters, agendas, materials provided and meeting notes will be maintained in an electronic file in Ms. Stinga’s Office named ENL/Teachers of ELLs PD 2017-18. PD was specifically aligned to CR Part 154. All teachers get 15% of their PD in ELL specific PD. ELL teachers get 50% of their training in ELL specific PD. The above calender from question 1 reflects the 50% PD for ELL teachers as per CR Part 154.2. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? Our ENL teachers will offer ELL Parent Tuesdays from 2:30-3:45. All parents of ELLs will be requested to meet with their child’s ENL teacher at least one time during the school year to discuss their child’s language development progress, results of the NYSESLAT, child’s language development in the content areas and the goals of the ENL program. Ms. Stinga and Ms. Roos speak Spanish so they will provide translation for Spanish speakers. We offer Arabic translation through an ELL parent who is fluent in both Arabic and English and have classroom teachers on staff that can assist with Albanian translation. For all other languages, The Translation and Interpretation Unit Over-the-Phone translation service will be used. A letter written in the parent’s language of choice on school letterhead will be sent home to invite the parent to the meeting. Parents unable to 9  attend on a specified day and time will be rescheduled through another letter or a phone call. In the event that the parent is unable to come to school, a phone call conference will be conducted. 2. A copy of all letters sent home will be kept on file under Annual ELL Parent Meetings in Ms. Stinga’s office for grades K-4 and Ms. M. Mandas' office for grades 5-8. Additional communication needed through letters sent home to parents will also be maintained in this file. ENL teachers will create a documentation log of phone calls made to the parents inviting them to the Annual Parent Meetings and or conferences conducted by phone with the parent. These logs will include notes of what was discussed and be kept in Ms. Stinga’s Office for Parents of ELLs in grades K-2 and Ms. E. Mandas' office for ELLs in grades 3-4 and Ms. M. Mandas' office for grades 5-8. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. :Our school offers many opportunities for our ELL parents to become involved in the school community. There is a PTA in our school that is very active in supporting our students and the school. The PTA meets monthly in the evening and encourages all parents to become members. We also offer ELL parents an Afterschool ENL Program. This program teaches basic English language skills to our parents. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Paste response here: 0 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Brandon Muccino, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 1  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: The Donald Hertz School DBN: 11X083 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Brandon Muccino Title Principal Jennifer Lana-Etzel Assistant Principal Ann Daly Linda Stinga Parent Coordinator ENL/Bilingual Teacher Jasmine Flores Parent Krisy Falotico/AIS Teacher/Subject Area Lisa Schwartz Teacher/Subject Area Rosemary Mecorra Linda Collins Coach Coach Stephanie Loretta School Counselor Meisha Ross Porter Rudy Rupnarian Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 6/30/17 6/30/17 6/30/17 6/30/17 6/30/17 6/30/17 6/30/17 6/30/17 6/30/17 6/30/17 6/30/17 6/30/17 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 2 2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools School Name: The Donald Hertz School Superintendent: Ross-Porter DBN: 11X083 The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Linda Stinga ENL Teacher No Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. 1.Our school meets the identified translation needs indicated in Part B by providing translation of the documents listed to parents in their preferred language of communication in a timely manner. The school maintains class lists with parent preferred language to assist in providing the correct language of communication created by the LAC Coordinator, Ms. Stinga. Ms. Stinga determines the languages needed to be translated. Preparation for the translation of written documents occurs two months in advance of distribution. The documents are drafted in English and then given to an appropriate staff member or sent to the Translation and Interpretation Unit for translation. In our school we have several staff members who serve as written translators for most of our high incidence languages including Albanian, Spanish and Italian. The remainder of the translation is performed by the Translation and Interpretation Unit. When all translated versions of the documents are received they are copied and collated into grade level classes. 3  2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral The preferred languages for both written and oral communication at our school are English, Albanian, Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, French, Korean, Italian,Philipino, Punjabi, Spanish, Urdu and Vietnamese. The preferred languages for both written and oral communication at our school are English, Albanian, Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, Italian,Philipino, Punjabi, Spanish, Urdu and Vietnamese. 84% 16% 16% 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. N/A Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency How do you Distributed to plan to Families The documents that our school disseminates each year that require translation and are distributed to families are as follows: Various translate? Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. Each letter home gets translated in 4  The School Calendar –September The School Handbook-September Overview of Grade Level Curriculum-September Afterschool Program Invitations-September/October Saturday School Program Invitations-October Parent-Teacher Conference Announcements-September, November, March and May New York State Testing Dates-October/March the 3 most predominant languages (Arabic, Spanish and Albanian). Our school website has a section where you can set up preferences to always display your language of choice. We also have a web app that presents the same information to parents also in their preferred language. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school The face-to-face meetings that our school has include: Parent-Teacher Conferences-September, November, March and May ELA Curriculum Night-October Math Curriculum Night-October ELL Parent Tuesdays-on going September-May Informal Interactions: various plan to provide interpretation service(s)? We have teachers who speak many of the languages represented. When we don't have a staff member who speaks a language we contact the Language Interpretation 5  e-mail communication to parents Attendance teacher calling parents-daily Guidance Counselor calling parents-weekly ENL Teachers calling parents-weekly Unit to assist in the translation. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. Emergency messages are sent through a phone app, email and phone call. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. We have a PD every year to address this issue. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) Our school has visited the website and printed out the required Notifications. The Welcome poster is posted at the main entrance to our Annex and Main Building. The Parents will receive copies of the Parents’ Bill of Rights, Parents’ Guide to Language Access in appropriate preferred languages and the language ID Guide is at the security desk and in the offices in the Annex and the Main Buildings. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? Our school will consult the data provided on the parent survey to ascertain if we can improve the Translation and Interpretation that we provide for our parents. Additionally, the ENL teachers will survey parents at ELL Annual Parent Meetings about the quality and availability of Translation and Interpretation that they have received from the school. Feedback from these surveys will be discussed with the administration and any changes necessary will be made. 6  7 
