 12X248 School Name: METROPOLITAN HIGH SCHOOL, THE Principal: LATOYA KEY 2018-19 CEP-CS 1  Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC)  Section 1: School Information Page School Information The Metropolitan High School 12X248 321200011248 9-12 1180 Rev. James A. Polite Avenue 718-9914634 School Number (DBN): 718-5727294 Fax: School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Phone Number: Latoya Key LKey5@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Dr. Latoya Key Email Address: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Raymond Hofmiller Latoya Key SoladeLegare Jose Gutierrez SarataKaba Justin Hardy District Information Geographical District: 12 Superintendent’s Office Address: Michael Alcoff Superintendent: 2 MetrotechSuite 3900, Brooklyn, NY 11201 malcoff@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: (718) 935-3074 Phone Number: FSC: Bronx (718) 935-XXXX Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) Jose Ruiz Executive Director:   1230 Zerega Avenue, Bronx, NY 10462/One Fordham Plaza, Bronx, NY 10458 Executive Director’s Office Address: Jruiz2@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: Phone Number: Fax: 718-828-7776/(718) 741-8895 (718) 828-6280   Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Dr. Latoya Key Raymond Hofmiller Marrero Jose Gutierrez SarataKaba Justin Hardy Roxanne Leak Gordon Collins AdelaidaRodriguez Diaz *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/ Teacher Member/ Teacher Member/ Parent   Name Ingrid Villavizar xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/Teacher Member/Teacher Member/Teacher Member/Teacher Member/Student Member/Student   Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with   the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement   Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Mission: Metropolitan High School will design positive student-centered instruction through hands-on learning, inquiry, and multiple opportunities for revision. We will create a supportive learning environment through community partnerships, family involvement, and character development. By doing so our students will graduate with the skills to be thoughtful risk takers, self-advocates, and contributing citizens.   2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. Metropolitan High School is a small high school located in the South Bronx serving approximately 407 students. In 2016-2017, Metropolitan was consolidated with its formerly co-located school, Peace and Diversity Academy that ceased to exist after the consolidation. Going into the 2016-2017 school year, since there had been significant leadership, faculty and staff turn over, students felt they didn't recognize their school as many adults were new and the two student bodies were merged. In order to respond to the expressed concerns of the students a Culture Committee was formed and launched. Working with our lead Community Based Organization partner, PHIPPS, the administrative team, faculty, staff and parents identified the school's most significant needs. Discipline policies, programs for student support, school-wide norms and traditions were re-established. A Peer Leadership program and teacher-led advisories were formed enabling the adults to know our students on a personal level. In the 2017-2018 school year, we put in structures that support our vision of a learning environment where students can build their intellectual curiosity, social skills, and self-confidence. Our teachers provided instruction using viable Common Core-aligned curriculum with a focus on high levels of participation, discussion and reflection on learning in the classroom to advance student achievement. In the 2018-2019 school year, we will continue to strive towards instilling the Metropolitan's core values which were crafted during the 2014-2015 school year. These are stated as follows: COMMUNITY- We believe in a strong community; we cultivate relationships with our students and families, we work through disagreements and search for common ground because a strong community leads to strong students. BELIEF IN STUDENTS- We believe our students have the potential to achieve their dreams. As a school community we support students in fulfilling their potential by overcoming initial failures through repeated effort. INTEGRITY - We value character and honesty. We believe in the power of personal choices and the strength that results from upholding our values. RESILIENCE -The path to self-improvement necessarily involves setbacks; we teach, value, and reward students who find success through the difficult path of learning from mistakes. INTELLECTUAL CURIOSITY- More important than knowing a collection of facts or traditional ideas of “being smart,” we believe in asking interesting questions, and pursuing our curiosity about the world. Metropolitan will continue to strategically partner with our lead CBO, PHIPPS and other CBOs like Astor Services to integrate social services including a mental health clinic into the fabric of the school to better serve the needs of students and their families. As a Community School our goal is to exist as a center of opportunities for families to receive the supports they need to make sure students come to school ready and able to learn. We are addressing chronic absenteeism as this has been an impediment to students' achievement. The school continues to build social emotional services, extra-curricular offerings including limited PSAL sports (soccer, baseball, softball, basketball), an active National Honor Society, and several small clubs (yearbook). 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. 0  Metropolitan has population of 30% Students with Disabilities and 31% English Language Learners (an additional 18% of students are former ELLs). The overwhelming majority of the school is Hispanic (71%) or Black (25%), with 95% of our student body receiving free or reduced lunch. The lower third of our general education students read below grade level. The academic needs of these groups of students relate to language acquisition and/or proficiency in grade-level literacy skills. They struggle with speaking, and listening and reading comprehension in English. With writing students have difficulty maintaining grade-level standards, which hinders their success in other content areas. Regents exams are often the deterrent to students’ timely graduation. Metropolitan’s graduation June rate after the second year as a consolidated school was 44% . Our attendance rate was 74.7%. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. An area of growth this past year has been in establishing an Instructional Lead Team that includes a lead teacher from each of the core subjects, including ENL and special education. The lead teachers have become leaders and have collaborated with department members , taking an inquiry stance, engaging in data analysis, reflecting on results, and participating in classroom visitations to mentor colleagues on instruction and implementation of the overarching school goals. Overall, the Instructional team has also been instrumental in leading department meetings, implementing Common Core-aligned curricula, increasing the use of questioning and discussion techniques, conducting school-wide professional development and increasing collaborative teaching partnerships. Lead teachers played a role in ensuring equity of voice between the administrative team and teacher teams, thus allowing true collaboration around the overarching school goals. To ensure collaboration and open communication, lead teachers established systems and structures to ensure dialogue and implementation of goals. Our overarching school goals for the 2018-2019 will build on the 2017-2018 school goals. They include the following:  Designing rigorous tasks that are Common Core and regents aligned (57% of students say that their classes make them think critically. Implementation of entrance and exit tickets as assessment of instruction   Grouping strategically  Tiering of tasks for the varied learners  Integrating rich academic discourse with an emphasis on vocabulary specific to the content (The 2017-18 School Quality Guide indicates that 39% of teachers stated that students respond to challenging questions.; 48% of teachers say that students build on each other's ideas during class discussion. (Q19a).  Providing actionable feedback to students  Monitoring and tracking student understanding using soft data and DOK questions  Conducting check of understanding through the traffic system (green, red, yellow cards)  Increasing teacher efficacy (The QG indicates that 72% of teachers say that the principal encourages feedback through regular meetings with parent and teacher leaders. (Q9e)  Providing Advanced literacies across content areas, including vocabulary development and usage through discussion strategies (i.e., turn and talks) Established systems and structures to ensure dialogue and implementation of goals include the Rigor Checklist designed by the Instructional Lead Team: The Focus of the Cognitively Complex Tasks at Metropolitan High School Cognitively Complex Tasks at Metropolitan High School: 1  1. Require experimentation with knowledge, content, and skills and moves beyond accepted ideas 2. Requires the use and analysis of evidence to support claims and hypotheses 3. Requires Students to have independence, autonomy, and the opportunity to make decisions The following Criteria are NON-NEGOTIABLES THAT MUST BE IN A LESSON PLAN Evidence of Non-Negotiables Yes / No Criteria and “Look Fors” Notes: Praise, Question, Suggestion Appropriate Academic Content:  Task has directions and assessment criteria (rubric, checklist, etc.) clearly communicated in student-friendly language when the task is first introduced.  Task requires students to demonstrate the targeted content area Rigorous Cognitive Engagement:  Task includes multiple entry points exhibiting the 4 modalities of learning  Task requires students to discuss and converse their reasoning and justification with their peers Opportunity to grapple/Experiment with Knowledge:  Task includes students to explain or justify their conclusion or thinking using textual evidence or data Higher-Order Questioning:  Task includes questions or prompts that are open ended and require students to engage in higher order thinking skills as per Webb’s Depth of Knowledge or Bloom's Taxonomy Student - Engaged Assessment (actionable specific feedback):  Task requires students and / or teacher to give feedback and ask questions of other’s solutions 2  THE REMAINING CRITERIA MUST BE DONE WITHIN A UNIT PLAN Evidence of Non-Negotiables Yes / No Criteria and “Look Fors” Does the task require students to choose and apply an appropriate model or strategy to a situation? Does the task require students to persist in applying strategies to a challenging situation? Does the task require annotating text or data for a purpose in response to a daily lesson prompt or unit essential question? Does the task require students to build upon content knowledge by connecting new concepts with evidence from previously read sources or data? Does the task include text to self, text to text, text world, text to media connections? Does the task require students to apply core academic knowledge to real-world problems or issues? Does the task require students to give feedback and ask questions of others’ solutions? Are students required to demonstrate a balance of mathematical procedures and deeper conceptual understanding? Does the task use and encourage precise and accurate mathematics, academic language, and representations (picture, symbols, equations, expressions, models, etc.)? Do students have access to problem solving strategies to help them complete the task? *”Task” is the product that the students are producing as part of the day’s lesson or at the end of the unit. Areas of progress for the 2017-2018 school year, as indicated in the November 8, 2017 PPO include communication around clear and high expectations to staff, students and families in a way that had an immediate and profound impact on the culture for learning in the school. MHS made strategic organizational decisions, including the allocation of resources and teacher time, in order to promote the school's instructional goals for the year. Teacher teams met by department weekly. The meetings were led by instructional team leaders identified by their willingness to take the lead. Teachers have common planning time to allow for co-teaching pairs to work together. In addition, the attendance team, principal, social worker, community school director meet weekly. MHS has opened up a college office to assist juniors and seniors in the college process. To promote collaborative teaching, Department Teams were formed to engage in inquiry related to academic success, literacy strategies, Regents task performance and support of at-risk students. Deep dives into specific focus areas were conducted by department; ELA teachers investigated annotations, Math teachers explored C.U.B.E.S (math strategy), Social Studies teachers focused on Socratic seminars, and Science teachers designed regents aligned writing tasks with an emphasis on vocabulary. Additionally, common planning was built into teachers' schedules to ensure collaboration among co-teachers. Teachers worked with coaches from the Borough Field Support Center and received professional development to build their knowledge of the Danielson Framework, co-teaching models, ENL academic vocabulary in math. Teachers studied and implemented "talk moves" and other frameworks to foster student-to-student dialogue. In addition, our teachers participated in intravisitations with a specific instructional focus in mind. 3  As a result, we saw more rigorous instruction incorporating CCLS and Regents-aligned tasks, increased student-to-student discussion, and self-assessment resulting in student engagement in our classrooms. In the 2018-19 school year, our priorities aligned with the rigorous instruction pillar of the Chancellor's Effective Schools Framework, will be student centered learning that results in engagement. Student centered learning will address what students learn, how they learn it and how their learning is assessed given each individual student’s needs and abilities. Feedback, self-reflection, goal setting and assessment are integral to student-centered learning. In addition, we will also focus on "the what of learning" or content, woven into rigorous tasks, literacy across all content areas through increased opportunities for speaking and listening using various speaking strategies (i.e., turn and talk, stop and jot, Socratic seminars...), and writing. These priorities are embedded in our "instructional focus" written as a theory of action. If teachers create a student-centered environment where students engage in challenging CCLS-aligned and Regents level tasks, participate in discussion, receive feedback and revise their work, then students will demonstrate a growth mindset and increased achievement. A second area of focus relates to the Framework of Effective Schools pillar "Supportive Schools". Our desire is for stakeholders to experience a positive, school culture that is safe, supportive, cohesive and caring community. In addition, we want Metropolitan to be a place where students feel known and actively take responsibility for their success as learners. We view attendance as an indicator of student connection with their school and believe students who are chronically absent are at risk for failure. Very often they have social and emotional or mental health problems. As necessary, our cell phone policy, and overall approach to school-wide discipline will be reviewed and improved to ensure we meet our goals and strengthen school culture. Some of this work will include implementing restorative justice practices and training for all staff members including teachers, deans, paras, aides and CBO members. Our CBO partnerships play a key role in work related to school culture. As a Community School, our lead CBO, Phipps Neighborhood will expand services that were implemented last year, such as the attendance "Success Mentoring" incentives, “college knowledge” and access support, social emotional learning during small student groups, and tutoring during school or after school. Astor/mental health clinic will continue to provide crisis de-escalation and intervention support. We are using performance assessments and teacher observations to measure the success of our instructional focus. We have created a rigor tool to measure the effectiveness of performance assessments. 4  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 12X248 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 09,10,11,12 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 411 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 37 37 6 5 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 7 8 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) 5 School Composition (2017-18) 95.0% % Attendance Rate 92.7% % Reduced Lunch 24.8% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.2% 71.3% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 1.0% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 1.09 0% 16% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation 64% 38% 45.1% 5.5% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A NO N/A N/A NO Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A NO N/A N/A NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A NO N/A N/A YES No N/A 135 126 76.3% 2.4% 29.0% 25.3% 1.7% 0.7% 4 32% 4.7 N/A N/A 60% 59% 70.0% 10% N/A No No N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A NO N/A N/A N/A N/A NO N/A N/A N/A N/A NO 5  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Rigorous Instruction: Strength: In the 2017-2018 a school-wide definition of rigor to ground our understanding of rigor when designing curriculum, lesson plans, performance tasks and assessments. Teachers intentionally challenge and engage students in cognitively demanding, open ended, thought-provoking questions, while designing authentic student-centered performance tasks which yield deep understanding of content by allowing for productive struggle, incorporating all four modalities, addressing all learning styles and appropriately differentiating and scaffolding for all learners to foster college and career readiness. The Metropolitan High School (MHS) will meet the needs of its students by providing rigorous instruction for all our students. The intent is to create instruction that is customized to meet the needs of our diverse and eccentric student population while simultaneously being aligned to the Common Core. We at MHS believe in setting high standards in every classroom; implementing these high standards will allow our students to engage in ambitious and independent real-life approaches while engaging students in activities that support critical thinking. In the 2017-2018 school year the administration established an instructional team which included teachers representative of all subject areas to turnkey strategies that can promote rigorous classroom instruction methods to all teachers through engaging them in hands on professional development activities. In 2018-2019 the instructional team members will oversee and monitor teacher creation and implementation of lessons that submerge students in a rigorous environment. The administration along with instructional team will utilize a rubric checklist when visiting classrooms to support pedagogy and instructional practices. We should see evidence of students wrestling with new content as they build the stamina required to reach higher levels of thinking. Additionally, we should see visible teacher moves that support the level of rigor of the academic task include the following:  Ask open-ended questions that encourage student thinking than requiring only recall  Keep description of task open ended to allow for students to make their own judgments about how to accomplish the task  Build on student responses, asking follow-up questions that support deeper content understanding  Draw frequent conceptual connections  Press for justifications, explanations, and meaning through questioning, comments, and other feedback 6   Give students the means to monitor their own progress toward accomplishing the objectives To support teachers' success in the classroom, and to collectively move from teacher-centered instruction to student-centered instruction, we will provide professional learning opportunities, individualized high-impact coaching to help refine and adjust instructional techniques, and review individualized data to track individual teacher growth and the impact of pedagogy on students. For the 2018-2019 school year students will engage in rigorous performance tasks that are aligned to the standards assessed on the Regents exams. Students will  participate in authentic tasks, allowing for reasoning (metacognition), multiple pathways to the solution, and  cultural relevance; consistently be held and hold themselves accountable for work production and mastery of content (eg. mastery in experimental design through consistent weekly lab inquiry, essay building and writing with college readiness, etc.);  expand and justify their responses for the writing parts of the practice or mock regents;  exhibit use of content vocabulary in both discussion and writing;  make sense of the problem both the instructions of what to do and the application of how to do;  engage in and complete timed regents aligned tasks to build their test taking momentum;  work in heterogeneous and homogeneous groups on rigorous tasks based on skill set/strengths to meet their daily academic and social goals. 51% of students in the 2016-2017 School Quality Guide indicated receiving peer support for academic work. Priority Need: Metropolitan High School will practice collective efficacy and cultural habits to promote student ownership and achievement. (District Priority #4) Supportive Environment: In the 2017-2018 school year the MHS's established consistent norms, routines, policies, procedures, and practices to create equitable classroom environments that support teaching and learning and increased family involvement and PD opportunities to build family capacity to support the mission and vision of the school As indicated in the 2017-2018 School Quality Guide a priority need is in improving classroom behavior. In the 2018-2019 school year Teachers will strengthen systems of balanced assessment to inform tasks, planning and feedback. Collaborative Teachers: As indicated in the 2017-2018 School Quality Guide 93% of teachers say that they modify instructional activities and materials to meet the needs and learning interests of their students (Q2c). MHS supports its staff and teachers through the process of collaboration. Teachers support each other through instructional practices and processes, such as inter-visitations and professional development. MHS teachers have aligned their classroom systems, structures, policies, and procedures cross content areas. Effective School Leadership: The MHS will create an environment where administrators and teachers are held accountable to moving the school forward academically through frequent classroom observations and actionable feedback. As indicated in the 2017-2018 School Quality Guide 83% of families say that the principal encourages feedback from the community and then through regular meetings (Q2b); 83% of parents felt that he principal works to create a sense of community in the school (Q3b); and 84% of families say that the principal promotes family and community involvement in the school (Q3c). 7  Strong Family-Community Ties: The MHS will support students and families by creating welcoming spaces for all members of the MHS comunity -staff, students, and parents. Trust: As indicated in the 2017-2018 School Quality Guide 93% of parents say that they feel respected by their child's principal (Q1i); 84% of families trust the principal (Q1j), and 84% of families say the principal words hard to build trusting relationships with families like them (Q1l) The priority needs that will be addressed in 2018-2019 include the following: Priority #1: Students regularly engage in rigorous Regents aligned tasks that are appropriately differentiated. Priority #2: Metropolitan High School will take a comprehensive approach to student literacy. Priority #4: Metropolitan High School will practice collective efficacy and cultural habits to promote student ownership and achievement. Improved Regents pass rates in multiple subjects (ELA, Math, Global and Living Environment) is an area of need. In June the passage rate in each subject area was: Global 42%. Algebra 57%, ELA 36%*, Earth Science 47%, US History 43%, Living Environment 56%. Increased credit accumulation is needed as well. The majority of the students are off track however we have put into place prep class, after school and Saturday School tutoring, and online classes for those who qualify. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, teachers coherent and consistent instructional practices will result in a minimum of a 5% increase from 2018 Global and ELA Regents exams passing rates in June 2019. 8  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Instructional Cabinet meets weekly, engages in discussion to calibrate ratings, norm accurate feedback and accountability for next steps; and strategically plan PD support Instructional Cabinet, along with Department Leaders, create high quality PD Calendar aligned with instructional needs (classroom assessment is a tentative instructional focus) Conduct formative and evaluative observations with feedback for all teachers, either discussing lesson observation, planning a future lesson, reviewing unit plans, or co-analyzing assessment data Work with the BFSC coaches in designing effective instruction and creating high-quality and tasks in ELA, ENL and Mathematics Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Teachers, Content Teachers Each Wed., Sep '18-Jun'19 Administration, Dept. Leaders Instr. Council 4th Wed. of month Each Wed., Sep '18-Jun'19 Instructional Council Teachers Each Wed., Sep '18-Jun'19 Instructional Administrators with teachers per cycles ELA/ENL/Math Dept., BFSC Coaches ELA Teachers 2 times per month Sep. '18 - Jun '19 Mon & Weds per schedule Sep. '18 - Jun '19 Department teams Department teams Implement CC-aligned curriculum in ELA (HMH collections), science (New Visions), SS (New Visions) & Math (Engage NY) Core subject teachers Use Department Team structure to unpack and modify curriculum units and plan instructional adjustments; implement independent reading and Literature Circles in ELA using HMH Collections Teachers August 9  -Leverage New Visions and BFSC professional development workshops to build teacher capacity in implementing CCLS -based curriculum, and co-teaching strategies including scaffolds. -Implement CUNY ELA and Math elective courses to reinforce reading, writing and math commensurate with college readiness -Support new teachers with planning and co-teaching models through coaching per BFSC Teachers of: calendar Global, US History, Earth Sci., Living Environment, All math courses, ENL Coordinator and AP ENL teachers On-going Sep. '18 - Jun '19 Sep. '18 - Jun '19 Tuesdays Oct.'18- Jun '19 Identified ELA and math teachers Teachers w/ < 3 yrs All teachers Identified ELA and math teachers Teachers with less than 3 years; Generation Ready Coach -Utilize Monday PD time to build understanding in 1e Danielson 3b, 3c, 3d and their relationship to instructional focus: student-centered learning Mondays Sep. '18 - Jun '19 -Leverage Grade Team structure/ meetings to build capacity in the implementation and assessment of the school goals and priorities All core subject area teachers -Ensure students are programmed according to Academic Policy to avoid redundancy and timely progress towards graduation by relying on input of key personnel such as F-Status Data Specialist and BFSC to build capacity in transcript analysis and programming -Participate in AP for All initiative by identifying key personnel (Coordinator, Peer Collaborative Teacher, AP teachers and Programmer, Counselors On-going Principal, Programmer/s All teachers All core subject area teachers 1 Monday per month Sep. '18 - Jun '19 0  teachers for vertical planning team); finalize course selection and materials; schedule to courses; recruit students; release teachers for training; schedule vertical team meetings Identified teachers, Beginning Aug 2018. and on-going 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Parent Teacher Conferences and Parent Outreach events, Pupil Path and other communications with parents will help them understand the course requirements and graduation benchmarks in terms of credit accrual and test passage. Saturday Academy will be introduced as a means for students to address their deficits. Letters of Introduction from Guidance Counselors will be sent to us in August, 2018. A Parent/Freshman Orientation will be hosted by Administrators, Guidance Counselors and the Parent Coordinator in August, 2018 to discuss expectations, school rules, study strategies, and key personnel. Other grade level student orientations will be held September, 2018. Open House for prospective parents and students will be held in Fall 2018 and Spring 2019. A workshop for parents of Freshmen and Sophomore students incorporating aspects that foster and ensure academic progress will be hosted by the Guidance Counselor and Parent Coordinator during Open School Night, September, 2018. The Guidance Counselor will meet with 12th grade parents and students in the Fall (November 2018) and 11th grade students in the Spring, 2018 (February) to review progress toward graduation. Follow-up meetings will be held with parents of seniors that are academically off-track throughout the school year. Time is specifically dedicated to parent engagement every Tuesday from 2:30pm until 3:45pm. Staff is dedicated to meeting with parents during this time frame via physical or verbal conference. Celebratory welcome information session and tour for parents and students that have accepted early enrollment into The Metropolitan High School. 1  The Principal, Assistant Principals, Parent coordinator, Director of CBO, Teachers and support staff will all participate in a variety of different ways to inform parents and to keep them involved in understanding rigorous instruction and the expectations of the school throughout the school year. Parent Workshops for school year 2018/2019 will be hosted by the Parent Coordinator and are listed below. Mental Health-Suicide Prevention September 2018 -Dealing with and Identifying Depression October 2018 - IEP Workshop October 2018 - Health Insurance October 2018 - Alcohol Anonymous for Parents & Students November 2018 -Paint & Sip December 2018 - Immigration January 2019 - Paint & Sip February 2019 -Show Me the Money (financial) March 2019 -Family Night (Men Empowerment) April 2019 - Family Night (Women Empowerment) Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Schedule to provide time for frequent instructional conversations with administrators   Hold instructional Cabinet with Departmental Leaders and Administrators  Grant to work with Literacy Design Collaborative  Participation in Advanced Academic & Positive Behavior Institute  Administrative schedule that allows administrators to focus weekly/bi-weekly observations of teachers  Funding to provide substitutes when teachers are on PD Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 2  By February 2019, all teachers will have 2 non-evaluative and 2 evaluative observations with high-quality feedback. Weekly: Review weekly instructional observations to assess implementation of unit plans Weekly: Review data from weekly Department Team Meetings and PD, including student and teacher work products and feedback Quarterly: Review teacher instructional work products and student assessment samples as a cabinet Quarterly: Review Advance Data to identify teacher growth Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) Teachboost will be used as a Teacher Support tracker and timely observation completion. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 3  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? Attendance needs significant improvement:  Daily Average Attendance rate for Metropolitan school 75.5% in 2018-2019  Roughly, 50% of students are chronically absent (students with less than 90% attendance) School culture needs to improve as indicated by our School Survey data: 51% of students agreed or strongly agreed that discipline is applied fairly in their school. (Q4h) 581% of students agreed or strongly agreed that they feel safe outside around their school. (Q7a) 68% of students agreed or strongly agreed that they feel safe traveling between home and their school. (Q7b 64% of students agreed or strongly agreed that they feel safe in the hallways, bathrooms, locker rooms, and cafeteria of their school. (Q7c) Last year, we worked to ensure Students with Disabilities were served in least restrictive environments to expose them to grade level work and to address achievement gaps for these students. In doing so, we recognized that a culture of high expectations for all students is needed, along with appropriate supports and services. By establishing teacher-led advisories, we helped all students to feel known by their teachers. Mental health issues keep some students from succeeding personally and cause them to act out in class when they are triggered emotionally. There is a great need to support students to ensure they attend school, feel safe and can overcome social and emotional hurdles to their personal and academic growth and success. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. 4  By June 2019, Metropolitan will demonstrate an increase in average daily attendance to 80% from the 2017-18 rate of 76.3%, and reduce the percent of Chronically Absent Students (students with less than 90% attendance) 10% to 60%, from the 2017-18 rate of 67.4%. 5  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). -Attendance Team, identifies priority list of students in “Chronically Absent List” (not including LTAs) and assign a staff member to each of these students to serve as “success mentors” (Weekly Attendance Team meeting) Chronically Absent Students Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) -Attendance Team works to close 407s including "no shows" -Guidance counselors work to transition overage and under-credited students to ideal settings such as YABCs and transfer schools -Accurately collect and report daily attendance and period attendance -Parents of chronically absent students are contacted regularly via letters (3 and 5 consecutive days of absence generates a letter to parents), telephone calls, emails, texts, and School Messenger service. Sept '18 - June '19 Attendance team meets every Tuesday Attendance Team members No shows Attendance teacher, Pupil Personnel Secretary and others Sept-Nov Jan-March Guidance counselors Absent and Chronically Late Students Sept '18 - June '19 Weekly Attendance Coordinator, AP in charge of Attendance All Students Sept '18 - June '19 Attendance Team members -Create a series of interventions (parent meetings, home visits, progress updates, incentives) for priority students on the Chronically Absent List (Phipps, Attendance Team) including Chronically absent Weekly All Students Community School Director Principal, 6  -Use structures (Culture Committee, Student Council) to plan and execute community-building activities and events to improve culture of the newly consolidated school Teachers, students Nov '18 - June '19 AP and Student Government Weekly -Launch after-school academic support and intervention and enrichment club offerings to support academic achievement, social growth and school engagement -Use AIDP grant and AIDP Social Worker and CBO partnership to provide intense intervention for difficult cases, provide counseling and conferencing to target students at risk. Chronically Absent Students -Work with CSD from Phipps Neighborhood to develop and define roles of each Community School team member, calendar, and structure for service deliver Teachers Teachers -Make HOWLs visible in every classroom and be explicitly referred to by teachers and/or students during the lesson and made relevant to content. Students will practice HOWLs as they grapple with difficult tasks and engage in discussion -Through regular professional development, observation feedback, and teacher teamwork, teachers will have ongoing support in effectively communicating the high expectations through Learning Targets, HOWLS and assessment criteria that define quality work -Develop Advisory structure with solid curriculum for social and emotional learning (College Board and Connect with Kids) Nov '18 - June '19 Wed/Th/Sat Sept '18 - June '19 Weekly Sept '18 - June '19 Weekly Sept '18 -June '19 Daily Community School Director Principal, AP and Student Government Social Worker Community School Director, Principal, APs Principal, APs, BFSC 2-3 times a week Community School Student advocates; Teacher-Advisors Sept '18-June '19 Principal, AP, Community School Teachers Sept '18 - June '19 Principal, APs, BFSC -Leverage referral system to be used by Grade Teams to access additional social emotional and mental health services; Ensure All students Teachers 7 use of referrals and SKEDULA anecdotals and ILOG to track, monitor services -Work with Astor Services CBO and BFSC to provide PD in Therapeutic Crisis Intervention Cycle Teachers Personnel, Parent Coordinator CBO Weekly Sept '18-June '19 Weekly -Work with BFSC and NYU to build teacher capacity in Restorative Approaches and embed in schoolwide approach to discipline Counselors, APs, Deans Aug ' 18-June '19 BFCS , Counselors and Deans. TAC-D Team Weekly 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Parent Led activities, community based programs that involve the school community, student lead activities where parents are invited, Parent Teacher Conferences and Parent Outreach events, Pupil Path and other communications with parent will help them understand the support that we have put in place for their child as well as their families. All teachers will participate in the September 'Meet the Teacher Night'. Parents will be given the opportunity to share pertinent information about their child. During this event parents are informed about their child's program The Principal, Assistant Principals, Parent Coordinator, Director of CBO, Teachers and support staff will all participate in a variety of different ways to inform parents and to keep them involved we are building.in the supportive environment. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Partnership with Phipps Neighborhood, Lead CBO Staff to serve on Attendance Team (Parent Coordinator, Pupil Acct. Secretary, Asst. Principal, Phipps Neighborhood CSD, Counselor, Guidance Counselor, AIDP Social Worker) Incentive Budget Attendance Data tracking (bulletin boards, online data that is accessible), "Going Green Campaign" AIDP Grant Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other 8  Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, the RSAL report will show student attendance of 80%. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Weekly attendance report from ATS (RSAL) and tracking of daily attendance (RDAL); New Vision's Heat Map data. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 9  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. All teachers participated in inquiry and other teams as well as collaborative planning time to ensure effective co-teaching partnerships. However, their perception of the teacher -to-teacher collaboration and professional development is varied. According to the 2017-18 School Survey: 79% of teachers agreed or strongly agreed that, at their school, teachers design instructional programs (e.g. lessons, units) together. (Q8a) 86% of teachers agreed or strongly agreed that at their school teachers make a conscious effort to coordinate their teaching with instruction at other grade levels. (Q8b) 96% of teachers agreed or strongly agreed that at their school teachers talk with one another about instruction. (Q8d) 57% of teachers agreed or strongly agreed that overall, their professional development experiences this year have been sustained and coherently focused, rather than short-term and unrelated. (Q10a) 61% of teachers agreed or strongly agreed that overall, their professional development experiences this year have included enough time to think carefully about, try, and evaluate new ideas. (Q10b) 64% of teachers agreed or strongly agreed that overall, their professional development experiences this year have included opportunities to work productively with colleagues in their school. (Q10c) 54% of teachers agreed or strongly agreed that overall, their professional development experiences this year have included opportunities to work productively with teachers from other schools. (Q10d) The majority of teachers engage in ongoing professional collaborations in department and grade level teams at the DEVELOPING level (per the '15-16 QR) where they are beginning to analyze assessment data and student work for students they share or on whom they are focused. Distributive leadership was viewed as emerging, with teachers assigned as content leaders. (4.2) This is an accurate picture of where our teachers were on this indicator in '16-'17. In indicator 2.2 was rated DEVELOPING "Across classrooms, teachers use or create course specific assessments, rubrics, and grading policies. Teachers’ assessment practices inconsistently reflected the use of ongoing checks for understanding and student self-assessment." IA lack of coherence in assessment practices result in limited feedback to students and teachers regarding student achievement. Varied use of effective checks for understanding, and 0  minimal notation of data gained from formative assessments impede teachers’ understanding of a clear portrait of student mastery, hindering the development of effective instructional adjustments in some classes. As a result, improved collaboration among co-teaching partners, teacher teams' use of data and formative assessment strategies to check understanding and progress is needed. Teachers need more voice in the planning of PD so they can experience it as more meaningful in terms of moving their practice. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 100% of Metropolitan teachers will meet weekly in department meetings, consistently implementing the the Harvard University Datawise inquiry protocol improvement process, resulting in improved performance as measured by a minimum of 75% teachers scoring effective on Danielson 1e and 3c. 1  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Create school schedule that allows for common planning time, grade team, department team meetings All Teachers Sep '18 - June '19 PD Committee, Principal Continue Professional Learning around building and maintaining strong ICT Partnerships Teachers meet weekly for grade and department meetings. Teachers meet with coteachers weekly. All ICT Partner Teachers All Teachers Sep '18 - June '19 Once per week teachers meet with the AP in charge of special education Work with BFSC Coaches to facilitate collaborative departmental meetings ENL Department Sep '18 - June '19 Monthly Embed Inquiry training and protocol training in Faculty Professional Learning Calendar (modeling use of Tuning Protocol, Teacher-led inter-visitation protocol, Consultancy Protocol, Assessment Analysis) Ensure accountability of teams to engage in inquiry and make instructional adjustments through Cabinet’s review of minutes and Team Goals sheets All Teachers Sep '18 - June '19 Teachers, teacher teams, Lead Teachers Weekly Sep '18 - June '19 Weekly BFSC Coach Department Lead in ENL Instructional Cabinet, Department Leads Principal, APs, Lead Teachers on Instructional Cabinet; coaches (if available) 2  Support ICT pairs in understanding and implementing effective co-teaching models and coherent planning. Establish and reinforce expectations for planning for accountability. ICT Pairs and ENL Teachers Sep '18 - June '19 Meet as an Instructional Council to monitor teacher team effectiveness and foster distributive leadership Lead teachers, Instructional APs Co-Teachers Monthly Nov.'18 -June '19 Instructional cabinet is held Weekly on Wednesday Principal, APs, Lead Teachers on Instructional Council; coaches (if available) BFSC team Same as above All faculty Oct.'18 -June '19 Principal and Instructional APs Provide Danielson aligned feedback that is formative and embedded in informal and formal observations on collaborative partnership between co-teachers under 4e Use Critical Friends and other protocols to take a "temperature read" on teachers perception of school culture and operations as a means of monitoring and revising culture, systems and culture Teachers Provide PD on Danielson 3d and QR indicators 4.2 and 2.2 so teachers understand how assessment is linked to how functioning teams use inquiry methods Conduct facilitated discussions between co-teachers to improve effectiveness of planning, instructional collaboration and differentiation Nov. 7 '18; 1st week in Feb; 1st week in May Nov., Dec., and Feb. Principal and APs Struggling Co-Teachers On-going as needed Principal and Instructional APs All co-teachers Celebrate effective co-teaching practices informally and highlight them in PD to reinforce differentiation strategies during teacher PD On-going and Monday PD in Jan.' Principal and Instructional APs, Gen Ready Coach 3  Collect sample student assessments (writing and assignments), feedback and rubrics and teacher's annotations explaining growth to increase accountability in feedback practices and the use of data to track student progress towards goals 18 and March '18 Monthly beginning in Oct. '17 Principal and Instructional APs, Gen Ready Coach 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Our school will introduce co-teachers during Parent-Teacher Conferences, offer workshops on Special Education settings, provide training in Pupil Path for school-home communication beginning in September. "Classroom snapshots" will be provided in our newsletter and on Facebook to whatever degree appropriate. SLT agendas will include the discussion of our priorities in this CEP to help parents understand the goals we are working towards. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Funding will be allocated for a Generation Ready coach to support co-teachers   Workshops from the BFSC on co-teaching and other ICT relevant strategies  Our new IEP teacher will support teachers in co-planning  Time is alloted in schedule that allows for common planning, Grade team, Department team meetings   Funding for weekly instructional cabinet meetings (per session) for teachers to participate Funding to foster other Team meetings where teachers will collaborate to improve professional learning and school curriculum (such as a CTE program exploration team), and Culture Committee Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA Title II, Part A SIG X PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 4  By February 2019, 50 % of the teachers will have engaged in 1-2 six week cycles of inquiry as evidenced by Department and Grade team minutes- and by June 2019, 100% of the teachers will have engaged in 3-4 six week cycles of inquiry as evidenced by Department and Grade team minutes Weekly: 50% of the teachers will share low-inference observations on ICT partnerships (each week a different group of teacher will share with their departments) Weekly: plan/debrief Professional learning as Instructional Cabinet based on teacher work products and feedback Weekly: Plan/Debrief Department meetings with Instructional Cabinet based on teacher work products and feedback Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. There will be on-going observations based on the Danielson rubric and expectations of the school; Weekly collaboration and feedback from teacher team leaders; Report card and progress reports and teacher scholarship reports, Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 5  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. My superintendent has given me feedback during the Principal Performance Observation process indicating a need for improvement in building consistency of effective instructional practice across classrooms, deepening assessment practices used by teachers and teams, providing timely feedback to teachers over the course of the year through Advance observations. In addition, there is a need to monitor and revise systems such as the work of our attendance team more regularly. Areas of effective practice included using organizational resources strategically and setting and communicating high expectations. The School Survey presented teacher's perception of school leadership as follows: 75% of teachers agreed or strongly agreed that the principal/school leader makes clear to the staff his or her expectations for meeting instructional goals. (Q11a) 59% of teachers agreed or strongly agreed that the principal/school leader at their school communicates a clear vision for their school. (Q11b) 62% of teachers agreed or strongly agreed that the principal/school leader at their school understands how children learn. (Q11c) 75% of teachers agreed or strongly agreed that the principal/school leader at their school sets high standards for student learning. (Q11d) 61% of teachers agreed or strongly agreed that the principal/school leader at their school sets clear expectations for teachers about implementing what they have learned in professional development. (Q11e) 68% of teachers agreed or strongly agreed that the principal/school leader at their school carefully tracks student academic progress. (Q11f) 59% of teachers agreed or strongly agreed that the principal/school leader at their school knows what's going on in their classroom. (Q11g) In terms of program coherence, teachers responded this way: 50% of teachers agreed or strongly agreed that at their school, once they start a new program, they follow up to make sure that it’s working. (Q8e) 54% of teachers agreed or strongly agreed that at their school it is clear how all of the programs offered are connected to their school's instructional vision. (Q8f) 57% of teachers agreed or strongly agreed that at their school curriculum, instruction, and learning materials are all well coordinated across the different grade levels. (Q8g) 6  Parents felt primarily positive about the school leadership in terms of inclusively: 90% of parents/guardians agreed or strongly agreed that the principal/school leader encourages feedback from parents/guardians and the community through regular meetings with parent/guardian and teacher leaders. (Q2b) 90% of parents/guardians agreed or strongly agreed that the principal/school leader at their school is strongly committed to shared decision making. (Q3a) 90% of parents/guardians agreed or strongly agreed that the principal/school leader at their school works to create a sense of community in the school. (Q3b) 90% of parents/guardians agreed or strongly agreed that the principal/school leader at their school promotes family and community involvement in the school. (Q3c) My priority will be to help improve the faculty's perception of program coherence, instructional leadership and teacher influence on instructional decision making. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 100% of Metropolitan’s school leaders will provide teachers with clear expectations about implementing what they have learned in professional development and in their classroom observations, resulting in a 10% increase from 61% to 67% on the Teacher Survey Question regarding whether the school leaders set clear expectations for teachers about implementing what they have learned in professional development. (Q11e) 7  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Establish a coherent vision of school improvement that is reflected in a short list of focused, data-based goals that are tracked for progress School Community Sep. 2018-on-going Principal with Administration Utilize CEP and short-focused goals (communicated as "LIFT" or other acroynym) to drive decision making in all dimensions of the school including refinement of systems and structures, culture and instructional core; teacher performance and teacher team feedback for improvement. Distribute expectations in revised faculty guidebook on professional responsibilities such as adherence to grading policy, online grade books, teacher team participation and other routines to ensure a positive, cohesive school culture. Have faculty acknowledge receipt of handbook to ensure accountability Revisit CEP goals and instructional focus during PD and SLT to ensure they understood and supported by the entire school community Sept. '18 Principal Sep. 2018-on-going Principal with other stakeholders School Community Faculty and Staff All stakeholders 8  Reorganize professional responsibilities for administrative team to ensure all school all areas of needed oversight (e.g. ENL programming, special education, safety, instructional supervision) are addressed, and to ensure mutual accountability Draft, revise and finalize goals and critical activities for APs. Set up weekly check-ins with each AP. Leverage this structure to move the work and keeps APs accountable for their goals. Hold weekly check-ins with Instructional Cabinet and Operations Team Leverage this structure to move the work and monitor and revise around school-level goals Instructional Cabinet Sep '18 - June ' 19 Principal with APs Weekly beginning Oct. Principal with APs APs APs Hold regular check-ins with staff during PD and teacher team meetings and other structures (such as cabinet, Pupil Personnel or attendance team meetings) to review data that are key to tracking progress towards grade, department and school-wide goals, all of which are aligned. Makes clear and purposeful budgetary and programming decisions, after consultation with key and relevant stakeholders (e.g. SLT and PHIPS on matters pertaining to our Community School program services. Teachers Sep '18 - June ' 19 Principal Instructional Cabinet Teachers Sep '18 - June ' 19 Principal Reorganize rooms and finalize move to integrate PDA staff with the new Metropolitan and ensure safe environment. Teachers Sep '18 - Dec. '19 APs Interface with appropriate Central Offices (e.g. Office of School Redesign, Division of School Facilities) to advocate and accomplish physical reorganization of the building related to consolidation Leverage Instructional Cabinet to review PD decisions, and other decisions that influence rigorous instruction, and the systems and culture that impact instructional core. Meet with Consultative Council to listen to teacher needs and concerns and provide responsive leadership Provide frequent and clear feedback to teachers from multiple sources (formative, informal and formal observations; and one-to-one conversations Central Offices Teachers Teachers Teachers On-going Principal Principal Principal and UFT Rep Principal and APs Sep '18 - June ' 19 Sep '18 - June ' 19 Sep '18 - June ' 19 9  Communicate clear instructional expectations to all staff, including classroom expectations, theory of action, and expectations for professional growth Teachers/APs On-going Principal and APs Meet with Instructional Council monthly to foster distributive leadership by providing lead Department Team Leaders feedback and guidance on effective teams Lead Teachers, 4th Wed of the month Principal with Instructional Council Meet regularly with Community School Director to ensure coherence across initiatives and services Ensure the aforementioned structures (SLT, Instructional Cabinet, Operations Team) contribute to the on-going evaluation of the quality of school level decisions, and support the adjustments to increase the coherence of policies and practices across the school, with particular attention to school culture and student achievement outcomes. Instructional APs CSD Mondays Principal with CSD All stakeholders On-going and Mid Year Principal with APs, CSD, Superintendent and his designees (Feb.) data review 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Frequent opportunities will be created for the parents to meet with school leadership: Coffees with the Principal, SLT meetings, workshops. An open door policies and communication through mailings and social media will be leveraged to ensure parents that their school is run effectively to benefit its students personal and academic success. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. - Funding for weekly Instructional Cabinet Meetings - PD for cabinet to learn how to facilitate teacher meetings, calibrate instructional understandings - We will utilize the BFSC for teacher coaching - Outside coaching to guide calibration - Instructional Resources to help planning (books, learning materials) Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other 0  Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By January 2019, Instructional Cabinet will have met at least 10 times to review data that informs the design of PD and adjustment to processes and programs. The mid-point goal will be a 5 to 7 % overall increase in areas of concern. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. - Student report cards; scholarship reports; January regents data; credit accumulation data - Observation reports (both evaluative and non-evaluative) that show progress toward the goal of effective - Attendance data -Professional Development plan Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 1  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. MHS's strengths relative to the Framework include data from the School Quality Guide which indicates that 85% of families say that teachers work closely with them to meet their child's needs. (Q1d; 83% of families say that they feel well-informed by the communications they receive from their school. (Q1e); and 85% of families say that they are likely to go to a regularly scheduled parent-teacher conference with their child's teacher. (Q6b). 82% of families say that school staff regularly communicate with them about how families can help their child learn. (Q1a) 95% of families say that their school communicates with them in a language and in a way that they can understand. (Q1h) The following are indicators of the need for more robust parent involvement in the school:  Monthly PTA participation in '17-'18 for Metropolitan ranged from 5-12 parents.  Metropolitan held parent events each year--Parent Teacher Conferences, Workshops, Community School Forum.  Communication to parents consisted of of Monthly Parent Newsletters, School Messenger reminders. Coffee Talk with the Principal commenced in February so that parents have the opportunity to speak about concerns in 2018  The parent coordinator organized workshops for parents, Stress, Mental Health-Suicide Prevention, Financial Aid, IEP, Paint Night, 9 Friday sessions of Nutrition and Health sponsored by Cornell University, Zumba and montly PTA meetings  72% responded positively to questions about Strong Family-Community Ties on the School Survey  During the first Parent Teacher conferences in '17-'18, eighty parents attended The data suggests that school leaders involve and communicate with the school community, including families, and age-appropriate students, in a limited way regarding school improvement plans and decision-making processes. In addition, ) the two former school communities were developing expectations that are connected to a path to college and career readiness systems to provide feedback to families regarding student progress toward meeting those expectations. There is much room for improvement in engaging parents with the school to benefit student success and timely progress towards graduation. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. 2  By June 2019 school personnel will hold one-on-one meetings with all parents to discuss their child's progress to graduation, resulting in an increase in parent participation of 5% from 2017-18 in PTA Meetings, parent outreach Workshops or event (e.g. Breakfast), Skedula communication, phone or email communication, conference, sporting events or celebration). 3  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Create and distribute a monthly, bilingual, newsletter and distribute hard and soft copies (Outreach Coordinator, Parent Coordinator) Working with Parent Involvement committee create a Community Involvement Plan, including a series of involvement activities, such as Zumba, Paint Nights, Nutrition workshops, SWD workshops Parents Sep '18 - June '19 Parent Coordinator Action Team, Sep '18 - June '19 AP for Engagement, Outreach Team (Parent Coordinator, Community Coordinator) Hold a monthly Parent Workshop on topics including College Admissions, Accessing Student Grades and Data, communicating with teachers, Job Search resources and skills, how to support Professionalism at school (uniform, language, punctuality) Parents, School Community Sep '18 - June '19 Parent Coordinator, Outreach Team Teachers Sep '18 - June '19 Leadership Team Sep '18 - June '19 Jan.-June '19 Sep '18 - June '19 Feb and May CBO CBO/Principal Parent Coordinator Principal, CBO Director and Parent Coordinator Create school schedule of options that fosters teachers conducting 45-75 minutes weekly of Parent Engagement to occur on Tuesdays and other times during the week; articulate tracking requirements Schedule funding effectively; Pursue grant funding for a Parent Educator Coordinator Working with new hire (Parent Educator Coordinator) implement robust parent education classes in ENL, computers, High School Equivalency and other offerings through expanded Community School funding. Parents Parents Communicate expanded Community School Services to parents such as mental health clinic for family therapy Parents Monitor Parent involvement goals using data sources Parents 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. PHIPPS Neighborhoods, and Astor Services are both family oriented organizations that help with the whole family not just with the students. Both organizations perform outreach services to support wellness of all members of the family. 4  Phipps provides programs for parents who want to learn English, parents seeking immigration information, parents who are need of housing, food or mental health supports; Also it also runs food and clothing drives for families in need of such help. Phipps also outreach to community agencies to allow for access to families of students in the school. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc.  Community School Grant (450K)  College Access Grant (30K)  AIDP Grant (100K)  Title III   Human Resources: Admin Team including ATR AP, Community School Director and CBO staff including Mental Fair Student Funding supporting Per Session for Academic Intervention after school Health Clinic professionals, Gen Ready Coach, F-Status Data Specialist, Social worker funded through AIDP grant Schedule adjustments yielding common planning time for co-teachers, Department and Grade Teams  Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By Feb. 2019, 2.5% of parents will be engaged and communicate with the school in one parent involvement activity such as PTA Meeting, PTC, Workshop, Breakfast, Skedula, Phone Communication, Sporting Events). Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Parent Teacher Conference attendance records, parent event sign-in sheets, SKEDULA data documenting parent out-reach, Central Office Dean and AP records that document parent visits to school; SLT and PA sign-in records. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 5  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Mathematics Science Social Studies At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Level 1 and 2 on Grade 8 NYS ELA assessment or previously failed ELA Regents exam. Level 1 or 2 on Grade 8 NYS math assessment or previously failed Algebra Regents exam Level 1 on Grade 8 NYS math assessment, failing score on previous science Regents exam or failing performance in class to date Failing score on previous Global / US History Regents exam or failing performance in class to date Students identified as having chronic absences, frequent discipline issues, or crises Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) English Regents prep, Summer Bridge Small Group, tutoring Algebra Regents Prep, Summer Bridge Small Group Science Regents Prep Small Group When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) After School, during summer school; Super Saturdays After School, during summer school; Super Saturdays After School, during summer school; Super Saturdays Global / US History Regents Prep Small Group After School, during summer school; Super Saturdays Counseling, Mediation, Guidance Support One-to-one or in pairs where appropriate During the School Day 6  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 25 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. School Supplies in a backpack, Snacks, clothing, shoes, monthly meetings with parents Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 7  3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. N/A 8  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified.  Work with Teacher Recruitment Office to leverage tools such as new teacher finder to identify HQ teachers in needed and hard to fill areas  Conduct outreach through email to all targeted HQ candidates  Execute phone interviews to buy-time and moving swiftly to identify potential HQ candidates  Attend hiring fairs  Provide on-going support for new hires in the form of coaching and study groups and PD outside of school relevant to needs  Provide teachers voice in school improvement  Ensure teachers effective formative, informal and formal feedback so next steps for improvement are understood  Create school community through events and rituals that nurture adult social and emotional needs  Be informed about incentives available through NYS and DOE such as loan forgiveness, communicate to teachers 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). All teachers will have opportunities to benefit from professional development offered through various sources according to their needs:  BFSC for content specific training in CCLS and Engage NY and lesson planning using HMH Collections curriculum  BFSC for training in co-teaching strategies for ICT and ENL settings  Writing is Strategic Thinking with Inquiry (WITSI) training will be provided as available through Community  School Office or Hochman organization Literacy Design Collaborative virtual coaching will support ELA teachers in designing CCLS-aligned tasks and assessments  Differentiated offerings will be provided on Mondays such as new teacher study groups  Teacher teams will learn and support one another through the Department and Grade Team structures 9  Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). N/A 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. We are entering the second year of our third year interim assessment initiative and will use frequent assessments to guide instruction such has lexile level reading assessment, Mock Regents and performance-based assessments at the end of unit modules. During weekly department meetings, teachers will analyze on-going assessments to future instruction. We will also have time during our Professional Learning sessions to learn what are the criteria for strong assessments, to practice creating strong assessments before a unit of instruction is taught, and to get feedback. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. 0 Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) X X X X X Column B Section Reference(s) 5a, 5b 5c 5c, 6 5a, 5b, 5c, 6, 7.2b Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 334,814 0 12,622 0 3,975,379 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH). 1   Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. Metropolitan High School in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act (ESEA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students Metropolitan High School will support parents and families of Title I students by:  providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology;  providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and  decision making in support of the education of their children; fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress;  providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments;  sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand;  providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; The school’s Parent Involvement 3  Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon an assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school.  In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will:  actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact;  engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a liaison between the school and families. This liaison will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESEA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Elementary and Secondary Education Act. ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; 4  ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) School-Parent Compact (SPC) Metropolitan High School, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act (ESEA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: 5  ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Elementary and Secondary Education Act. I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff 6  ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with theElementary and Secondary Education Act Title I requirement for Elementary Secondary Education Act (ESEA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; 7  ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 8  Addendum: Community School Partnerships Directions: The Community School (CS) strategy is directly aligned to the Framework for Great Schools. Community Schools bring schools and community partners together and integrate academics, health, youth development, and family engagement to provide students with the tools and opportunities they need to succeed. The Core Services in Community Schools are Expanded Learning Time (ELT), Attendance Supports, Family Engagement, and Health & Wellness. Part 1 – Community School Partnerships Goal(s) How is the CS strategy integrated into academic instruction at your school, and what impact has it had on student academic outcomes? This will be our second year collaborating with Metropolitan High School under the leadership of Dr. Latoya Key. For this upcoming school year, we will work in collaboration with the school's Administrative team to align our supports with the 2018-2019 Comprehensive Education Plan (CEP). Phipps Neighborhoods will support academic progress via our Student Advocate Model. We currently have 3 Student Advocates who will be assigned a caseload of students in each grade cohort to provide targeted academic interventions. The Student Advocates will be assigned to plan and partner with school staff and teachers to support students via success mentoring, classroom push-ins, small-group instruction, ELT, tutoring and mentoring to promote and offer healthy academic and behavioral progress. Student advocates will also offer one-on-one check-ins with students on their caseloads to develop Individual Achievement Plans to set goals for the school year in Academics, Behavior and Attendance. The expectation is that students will thrive with the additional supports and will begin to take on a more positive view of both their abilities and their future capabilities. Indicate the summative goal(s) of the Community School for the 2018-19 school year. Be sure to construct the goal to be SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Realistic, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 60% of students within the Student Advocate case load will show an increase in attendance. The increased attendance will subsequently result in the improvement in scholarship and more engagement by engaging in a structured mentoring program. In addition, by June 2019, the overall ADA will be 80%. Phipps Neighborhoods will work to support the school to reduce suspensions by 15% via restorative practice training and implementation for students, families and school staff. Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Community School Annual Goal(s): How will achieving your Community School Goal(s)--in Expanded Learning Time (ELT), Attendance Supports, Family Engagement, and Health & Wellness--support your academic goals for students? As described above, Phipps Neighborhoods Community School at Metropolitan High School will implement a full-service Community School Model via our Student Advocate model as well as utilize resources and other Community Based partners at the school. Phipps will work to support Metropolitan High School to develop an After- School Program. This program will target all students, specifically 9th and 10th graders to assist with their transition and success in High School, while providing opportunities for them to be mentored by 11th and 12th graders. For our 9th and 10th grade students we will be offering Academic Enrichment via homework help, tutoring, social emotional learning, Service and Project Based Learning, extra-curricular activities and career and college readiness. Our 9th & 10th graders will also have the opportunity to participate in our Compass Program being offered through DYCD funding. For our 11th and 12th grade students we will be offering Mentorship, career and college readiness workshops. We will also be establishing internships for our students to gain exposure to different careers. We will aim to have at least 50% of our parents attend at least one school event around attendance, academics, mental health and social-emotional support while connecting them to a needed service within the community and/or city. Through support of our MH funding and partners we will provide crisis intervention programming, to help with increasing number of students that are suspended. We will consistently work with the school to leverage supports to 9  engage our families and community members to assist with meeting our CEP goals. Our Student Advocates will also work to assist all students with setting and meeting attendance, academic and social emotional goals, while tracking their progress with the flexibility to modify plans as need through ongoing assessments. Part 2 – Community School Partnerships Core Services Action Plan Part 2a. Identify the Community-based Organization (CBO) partnerships that you will develop in ELT, Attendance Supports, Family Engagement, and Health & Wellness, their target student population(s), and scope of the services provided. As well as supporting schools’ supportive environment and attendance work, CBOs should be helping to support your school’s instructional focus. CBO Partnership PHIPPS Center for Supportive Schools: PGC Astor Services Target Population Scope of Service SY17-18 SMART Goal Increased Attendance; Improved Academic Performance; College & Career Readiness; Improved School Culture and Climate The goal is to have advocates focus on students who are absent between 80% to 90% of the time to move them up 5% Improved School Culture and Climate; Improved Health & Mental Health Services The goal is to increase the clinician's active caseload to 25 students. The target population is every student at Metropolitan High School however our Student All students, with a primary focus on students who need clinical counseling. The clinician will also target students who periodically need to speak to someone about less severe issues, such as issues with family, school, and other non-clinical issues. We aim for the clinician to have an active caseload of at least 25 students while providing additional support to the school and families. 0  Part 3 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 3a. Indicate resources your Community Partnership will leverage to achieve your summative SMART goal(s) and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc.  o Phipps Neighborhoods will leverage partnerships with South Bronx Rising Together, World Vision, and Kaplan to bring assistance around attendance best practices, college access, and career planning. Phipps has also created a partnership with Kaplan to provide SAT services and Center for Support Services for Peer Group Connection to assist in providing emotional support. Part 3b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) X X Title I SWP Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 3c. Describe how the school will partner with the Lead CBO to do the following: 1. Community Schools are expected to partner with a community-based partner organization (CBO) and together with members of the School Leadership Team, hire a Community School Director. The Director will lead implementation of the asset and needs assessment process, and other critically important coordinating activities. Indicate how you will leverage this aspect of the work. Community Schools are expected to personalize the needs of all students, through strategic programming and services, as determined by the asset and needs assessment, and must also offer Expanded Learning Time (ELT) and mental health programming. In completing this section, ensure that you think about how: (1) the right services are provided to the right students and families at the right time; and (2) how you will seamlessly coordinate services with instructional programming happening throughout and outside of the school day. Indicate how you will implement this work, and describe other programming you anticipate to be in place to strengthen this initiative. Community Schools are expected to emerge as Partnership Schools, which are places where parents and families feel welcome, actively participate in the conversation and decision-making around the renewal of their schools, and have many opportunities to advocate for their children. Monthly meetings and Community School Forums engaging families and community stakeholders will be a critical part of this family engagement strategy. Describe how you will implement this aspect of the work. Community School Principals are expected to meet on a weekly basis with their Community School Director, select Assistant Principals, key staff, and other CBOs, to analyze trends in data and case manage individual students. Data tools – including the New Visions Data Sorter - and training will be available for schools to use. Indicate how you will implement this aspect of the work. 2. 3. 4. 1. The CSD, will lead in implementing an asset and needs assessment process to gain essential resources and develop key partnerships to fully meet the necessities of Metropolitan High School. The CSD will coordinate the following processes to conduct the needs/assessment: 1. Utilize the School Leadership Team to prioritize an asset & needs assessment analysis 2. Conduct a Readiness Assessment 3. Review of Archival Data (after school attendance, suspension rates, attendance, # of English Language Learners students, # of students in temporary housing) Identify top 5 Priorities of Data 4. 5. Develop surveys of Teachers/Parents/Students 6. 7. Focus Groups Informant Interviews 1  8. Analyze Results This aspect of the work will be leveraged through driving the decisions of the Community School’s programming and operations that are intentional and meet the most pressing needs of the school. In addition, the Asset and Needs assessment process will also be leveraged by focusing Phipps Neighborhoods time, talent, and resources to most fit the unique needs of the school. The right services are provided to the right students through a twofold approach. First, Phipps Neighborhoods employs the Student Advocate model, which mirrors the Success Mentor Model. Each mentor develops personal relationships to students on their caseload. Through inquiry and constant communication, Student Advocates look for ways to address the needs of their students and their respective families. The second way, which Phipps Neighborhoods provides the right resources to the right students at the right time, is through collaborating with other members within the school community, such as Teachers/Parent Coordinator/School Psychologist/Attendance Teacher/ and front office staff who have direct interactions with families on a daily basis. Phipps Neighborhood will coordinate services through mental health programming through sub-contracting Astor Services within the day and after school. Phipps Neighborhoods has contracted with Astor to provide services through the organization’s collaboration with all teachers and Administrative staff. In regards to Expanded Learning Time, Phipps Neighborhood will provide Lunch & Learn, which are ELT opportunities that occur during lunchtime. In addition, Phipps offers an After School program that provides an ELT component through the DYCD Compass grant. We will implement this work through creating parent friendly activities that support families. This year we intend on collaborating with the Parent Coordinator to support parent-centered events. i.e (Know Your Rights. “Show Me The Money” – Scholarship Events. Family Paint Nights. These engaging activities allow many parents to feel comfortable and generates a welcoming environment for them. The CSD and the Principal meet on a daily basis to analyze data at CSD/Principal weekly meetings, Attendance Meetings, Success Mentors meetings, and Cabinet meetings. The use of the New Visions Data sorter will be used in all of these meetings to drive decision-making. Part 4 – Community School Partnerships Oversight Part 4a. Key Staff and Partners 1. Name and describe the scope of involvement of all community partners working in the school (include partners supporting ELT, counseling, enrichment, etc.) 2. Name the members of your Community School Team and how meetings will be organized and structured to engage all stakeholders and be focused on results. 3. Explain data strategies including the use of the data sorter, and steps that the school will take to ensure that the appropriate interventions are provided to the right students 1. Within the Metropolitan community, Phipps Neighborhoods works with a multitude of community partners within the school. For ELT, Phipps has garnered funding from the DYCD to offer After School services to students. A daily component is to offer homework assistance, tutoring, and STEM related activities. For counseling, Phipps has brought in Astor to offer enhanced clinician services to students. These services range from targeted interventions to universal/selective interventions to students. These interventions include everything from promoting mental health awareness, encouraging students to seek mental health concerns, and providing students with the tools they need to navigate mental health difficulties/conditions. 2  Phipps also works closely with other partners in the building around Counseling: such as the social worker, school psychologist and school counselors. For enrichment Phipps Neighborhoods employs Student Advocates who work closely with both teachers and the Administration. Student Advocates attend grade school team meetings, attendance meeting and conducts case conferences with students to discuss ways to enhance enrichment. Outside of the school, Phipps Neighborhoods has partnered with South Bronx Rising Together to bring assistant around attendance best practices, college access, and career planning. Phipps has also created a partnership with Kaplan to provide SAT services and Center for Support Services for Peer Group Connection to assist in providing emotional support. 2. The members of the Community School Team are concurrent with the Senior Leadership Team meetings. They include the PTA president, PTA vice president, teacher, parent, Assistant Principal, and the Principal. The CST is held jointly with the Senior Leadership Team meeting. The meeting is structured to evaluate existing policies within the school to determine effectiveness. The group looks to determine what works, what does not works, and make suggestions on ways to the changes possible. 3. Phipps Neighborhoods will be utilizing the New Visions Data Sorter. The Data Sorter takes information from ATS and shows real time trends with said data. The Data Sorter also creates “Strategic Data Check In” which are systematic routines to identify students who are reaching certain risk factors. (chronically absent & severely chronically absent) The Data Sorter also affords Phipps Neighborhoods and the School staff to assign point people to students showing needed intervention. Phipps has a targeted approach to attendance. The organization’s attendance philosophy is based on categorizing students in 3 Attendance Tiers. Tier 3: Severely Chronically absent, Tier 2: Chronically Absent, Tier 1: At Risk/No Risk to become Chronically Absent. We use a Success Mentor model and have Student Advocates who serve as Success Mentors. Phipps will provide interventions to all 3 Tiers but a specialized approach to Tier 2 students. For Tier 2 Students Student Advocates will have a case load of 20 students for Tier 2 students. Part 4b. Indicate resources needed including human resources, instructional resources, and schedule adjustments to implement the Community School program. The resources needed to implement the Community School Program: Human Resources, Phipps will need Students Advocates to execute the Success Mentoring model, collaboration with school staff and access to instructional resources. Part 4c. Timeline for implementation and completion, including start and end dates. From July 1st 2018 to June 25, 2019 Phipps will start implement its Success Mentor model in improving Attendance, School Climate & Culture, Parent Engagement, College Access, and Social Emotional Wellness. Attendance 1. Attendance Incentive Trip 2. Monthly Recognition during the first week of the month 3. Student Advocate monitoring of students’ attendance and checking in with students on a weekly basis. Family Engagement 1. Sponsorship of a Monthly Family Activity Event 3  Social Emotional Supports Social Emotion Support (Monthly) Part 4d. Mental Health Work Plan Separate from this S/CEP, schools will complete a Mental Health Work Plan that will become an addendum to this document. 4  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 5  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: Rationale: At the start of the 2018-2019 school year, we will have 109 ELLs, (102 Spanish, 3 Arabic, 3 French and 1 Wolof) all of whom will participate in a Freestanding ENL program. Due to the significant portion of ENL students at The Metropolitan High School, we have chosen to offer supplemental instruction in the form of Saturday school and after school tutoring sessions in order to assist in language acquisition and regents passing rates. Subgroups and grade levels of students to be served: There are 109 students in our ESL population. There will be 9 (9th graders), 36 (10th graders), 30 (11th graders) and 34 (12th graders). ELLs by Subgroups: # ELLs (0-3 yrs): 42 ELLs (4-6 yrs): 26 ELLs (completed 7 yrs): 31 SIFE: 18 Schedule and duration: The administration of the Metropolitan High School is proposing to utilize Title III funds by providing an after school program for ELLs two days a week on Wednesdays and Thursdays from 2:30-4:30. This program will provide academic support in a small group setting in English literacy, U.S. and Global History, and ELA. The ENL teacher will conduct these two weekly after school sessions in a stand alone setting in one of the school's two computer labs. The program will commence in November 2018 and end in June 2019 and will be held for a total of 28 sessions. In addition, our Saturday academy program for ELLS will offer content area instruction in social studies and ELA. Students will receive Regents test prep and reading and writing development through reading digital texts chosen by students that are viewed as "enrichment" texts. The program will be staffed by one ENL teacher, one social studies teacher and one ELA teacher. The ENL teacher will lead two hours of standalone instruction during this time frame. To encourage attendance and participation, students will receive extra credit towards their class grade in their core content classes. The Saturday program will begin seven weeks prior to each Regents administration (January/June) for a total of 14 sessions. The hours of operation will be from 8:30am - 12:30pm. Language of Instruction/Types of material: Our ELLs are held to high expectations and given high supports to meet them. The ENL teacher provides ENL students with the necessary supports of ENL instruction. Teachers of ENL employ ENL methodologies and pedagogical approaches in order to assist students in ELA and social studies as well as aid overall language acquisition. This instruction is supplemented with online programs, including Castle Learning, CommonLit and DuoLingo, all available in multiple languages. The primary language of instruction will be English, though materials will be made available in the students' home language when necessary. In addition, Pearson's iLit ENL program will be utilized and provide a research-based, digital intervention platform that is enhanced with explicit, point-of-use scaffolding (students click on words in digital text and they are translated); ELL strategies and content to support English language development so English learners, including long-term English learners. This includes 6  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information building academic language through word study; develop prosody with the English language; engage in academic discourse by improving English language production; become independent readers who reach classification and are successful working at grade level. Native language support (embedded in ILit materials) will be used to make content comprehensible to students. This dynamic not only makes everyone feel part of a learning community but also builds student confidence, which increases risk-taking and accelerates growth and development. All records, such as student attendance and assessments, will be kept on file. Number of certified teachers: Three fully certified content (ELA, math, SS) teachers and 1 certified ENL teacher will provide instruction during the after school program depending on enrollment and funding. Materials: The variety of instruction materials will be used to aid language acquisition and making content comprehensible. iLit (Pearson) will faciltiate differentiated online instruction to improve students’ reading and writing skills, in the targeted language. The ESL teachers and students will also utilize CASTLE Learning an online resource which uses assessments aligned with the Common Core for Regents content development. Both online sources are used to build vocabulary development and writing skills. NYS approved bilingual glossaries will be used by students to help with comprehension. Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: All five ENL teachers at The Metropolitan High School will participate in professional development to expand their capacity to support English Language Learners and contribute to co-teaching partnerships. Teachers are attending a PD series offered by the Office of English Language Learners at the BFSC with a strong focus on effective implementation of co/team teaching. The ESL teachers will be attend professional learning cycles and offerings led by the Bronx Field Support Center starting in September 2018. These workshops are conducted as a series of four to five sessions. ESL instructors will also attend other Professional Development opportunities as they are announced throughout the year. This information will be essential and will be shared to the remaining staff in order to improve teaching and learning across all content areas during in school Professional Development workshops and staff meetings. In addition to the PD offered by the Bronx Field Support Center, teachers are working with Generation Ready coaches, and Literacy Design Collaborative coaches to design stronger tasks for students with scaffolds for ELLs. ENL teachers are also offered PD through extended PD time on Monday. Additionally, teachers are offered PD during department and team meetings. Some professional development topics include differentiating instruction, questioning and discussion techniques to provide speaking scaffolds to students via accountable talk, offering strong feedback and tracking specific student growth in reading, writing, listening and speaking. All records, attendance and agenda are kept on file. 7  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: Parental involvement is paramount to student success. We recognize that many of our ELL parents find involvement with their child’s school to be frustrating. As such, our school is extremely dedicated to building relationships with parents that will increase student achievement. Parents will be encouraged to take part in workshops on various issues that will educate parents on how to participate in the educational process of their children, and on topics that concern adolescents such as bullying. Online video resources recommended by the FACE ("Connect with Kids") will be purchased and used for workshops and home learning in Parents' Native language. Notification: Letters will be sent to parents in their preferred language. A telephone messenger will be used to notify and remind parent weekly about the institute; the messages will be translated as needed. One hour educational workshops will be offered to parents. Other workshop topics to be covered include the following: How to support your children's learning at home; showing examples of student work so families can see what students are learning and working on; Curriculum Bingo - a fun game parents can play in their home language; Parents as partners to review graduation data to increase the graduation rate of Latinos. Records, including agenda and attendance, will be kept on file. Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. NA NA NA Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits) NA  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials. NA NA 8  Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA 9  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 12 School Name Metropolitan High School Borough Bronx School Number 248 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Dr. Latoya Key Coach N/A ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Dr. Seignon Teacher/Subject Area Mr. Ziegler/English Teacher/Subject Area Mr. Potts/Math Related-Service Provider Ms. Hilario Superintendent Michael Alcoff Assistant Principal Lydia Cordero Coach N/A School Counselor Marjorie Allen Parent Nancy Marrero Parent Coordinator Arisely Pena Field Support Center Staff Member Rosa Salcedo Other (Name and Title) Mr. Soto, ENL Teacher C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 0 5 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 2 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 1 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 407 0 Total number of ELLs 109 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 26.78%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 1 2 3 4 K Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 5 6 7 8 0 0 0 0 9 0 0 0 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? The Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS) is given to all newly-admitted students to the NYCDOE public schools and their parents during the admission and registration process at Metropolitan High School. The HLIS is also given to students who are re-entering the NYCDOE school system after having been enrolled in a school outside of NYC and/or NYS for 2 or more years. Our ENL coordinator will complete the HLIS with parents and ensure timely entry of information into the designated ATS screen. The ENL teachers will also interview students and the guardian in English or their native language with assistance from a family translator, a fluent staff member, or DOE translation service. If a student’s home language is English, the ELL identification process terminates at this step. Students whose home language is not English are eligible to take the NYSITELL. A designated ENL teacher will administer the NYSITELL to that student within the first ten days of enrollment (or re-enrollment). If a student’s native language is Spanish, the Spanish LAB is administered by our certified Spanish teacher or one of the teachers who is fluent in Academic Spanish language during the same 10-day testing window. 1  The Spanish Lab data is used for placement in SIFE or a bilingual program. The SLAB is also used to determine how proficient the student is in Spanish. This information can be used in planning instruction to help differentiation. The NYSESLAT data from Spring is used to inform instruction for all ELLs. Students are programmed based on their NYSESLAT levels (entering, emerging, transitioning, expanding, and commanding). 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? The BNDC screen in ATS is used to record and update the data of students who are identified as SIFE. The school administers the state SIFE exam to students. At the end of the year the school re administers the SIFE exam to determine growth. In addition, the NYSESLAT is administered to students and when students score at the transitioning level, they are no longer SIFE. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? The success of the ENL program is measured using students' growth on the SIFE exam (MLS), growing from entering to transitioning; the spring NYSESLAT, moving from the different proficiency levels, and passing the 5 required Regents Exams. According to the EDAT report of December 2017-2018, our ENL population is in need of support in ELA, credit accumulation, high school graduation, and students exiting the ENL program. Progress is measured on the NYSESLAT, the regents, and by the ENL graduation rate. According to our ELL Data Analysis Tool (EDAT) from the Spring 2017 NYSESLAT, 1% passed the ELA regents, 29% of our ENL students are under-credited, 34% of our students are held over in the past 3 years, 73% are at risk, and 41% of our students are long term ELLs. By the end of the school year, we plan to have at least a ten percent increase on ENL credit accumulation, have at least 80% of our ENL in grade 9 move up a level on the NYSESLAT, an increase of 25% of ENL in grade 11 on the ELA Regents, and have 10% of our long term ell score at the commanding level on the NYSESLAT. Ultimately, we will have an increase of at least 10% of ELLs accumulate enough credit to graduate from Metropolitan High School. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? The following structures are in place to address intervention once the NYSITELL, SIFE exam, SLAB, and regents are gathered. There are five ENL teachers in the school, the ILIT reading program, co-teaching in all ELA classes, stand alone classes, and Saturday School. There is an ENL teacher for each grade who serves as a co-teacher to provide additional instruction in the areas of English and history. Entering and emerging students are scheduled for stand alone classes. The school invested in a reading and writing program called ILIT where students are able to read daily. There is a regent's class created for ENL students as an additional resource. Furthermore, Saturday School is also available ENL students who are in need of support. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] When students score below a 65 on the regents and do not move up levels on the NYSESLAT and struggle in class, the school intervenes. The administrators analyze students' progress on the NYSESLAT, class tests, and class work. In addition, the growth of the student on each of the modalities of the NYSESLAT is examined, performance on content tests and class work, class participation, teacher input to see if students are in need of a service in addition to an ENL or a bilingual program. Academic Intervention Service (AIS) are offered to all ENL students. The school implements the RTI framework and considers a student’s language (literacy and orally in both native and second languages), culture, and educational history. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. The NYSITELL, NYSELSAT, and Regents data are used to evaluate and inform our ELL program. The NYSITELL is used to place students in the appropriate level. According to the RLAT, patterns across proficiency levels on the NYSESLAT show that the majority of our ELLs score high on the speaking and the writing modality of the NYSESLAT. 2  Our students need support in literacy and math. According to the REDS report for Algebra, ENL students struggle in math. As a result, the school will support students in math and reading through after school activities and Saturday School. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? This data is analyzed when the principal meets with the school's instructional team, consisting of 6 teachers, to represent each department. The ENL coordinator is one of the instructional teachers and shares all concerns with the other teachers in the ENL department. The department meets together on a regular basis to ensure that students are receiving support in reading and math. The support is provided in standalone classes, co-teaching classes, after school and during PM School via Castle Learning, during tutoring with content area teachers, and during Saturday School. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. The Metropolitan High School offers a ENL program consistent with NYS Commissioner's Part 154. regulations that includes stand-alone credited ENL classes and integrated ENL/ELA support along with flexible programming to support ELLs in other content area courses. English Language Learners at Metropolitan High School receive instruction in the targeted language (English). ENL stand-alone class instruction is led by licensed ENL teachers and the curriculum is designed to identify and develop specific English skills aligned to the ELA regents and NYSESLAT. For the 2017-2018 school year the ENL stand alone classes were configured by both grade level and English proficiency level for the purpose of creating linkages to subject area topics where possible. In other words, 9-10th grade students entering and emerging students are placed together; and 11th and 12th grade students entering and emerging students are grouped in ENL stand-alone classes. ENL students at the Entering, emerging, transitioning, and expanding levels receive integrated English with and English and a certified ENL teacher. The students are grouped together by grades and English proficiency levels. Our commanding students receive 90 minutes of integrated ENL service in the content of areas of English or social studies. According to the EDUR report, The Metropolitan High School is in compliance 100% in meeting the NYC and NYS ENL programming requirement. b. TBE program. If applicable. N/A c. DL program. If applicable. N/A 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? 3  a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? ENL teachers and administration meet before the start of school to review data on incoming ELLs and returning students to determine the program for ELL student and to ensure groupings were configured by level and grade to provide optimal support for students. Each student program is checked against the required number of instructional minutes per Part 154 and where necessary, programmatic changes are made to student or teacher schedules. Emerging and Entering students have support in standalone classes as well as in their English class and content classes; transitioning students have support in English and a content course where available; expanding and commanding students have integrated support where available. The effective programming of ELLs to align with Part 154 requirements was supported by the Borough Filed Support Center to ensure 100% of our students receive the mandated number of minutes of support each week. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. English Language Learners at Metropolitan High School receive instruction in their target language (English). Students with limited English Proficiency receive integrated ENL support in English and content area courses. ENL teachers travel to classrooms with a concentration of ELLs and assist the students in their targeted language and content teachers in adapting lessons. Content area teachers and ENL teachers plan lessons together. The content teachers provides content of the lesson and the ENL teachers accommodates and provides scaffolding resources for the lesson. Both teachers continually receive professional development on site and off site on how to address the needs of language learners and differentiation of instruction in their subject-area. In order to address the levels of ELL subgroups, teachers utilize approaches that create points of entry during instruction, through various methods to represent information such as with visuals or graphics, modeling, and guided practice. English Language learners are given tiered tasks and differentiated materials in literacy classes. They also receive native language resources such as bilingual glossaries for contents such as mathematics, science and history when available, and according to individual student needs. Content area instruction is delivered in English by fully certified content specialist. Certified ENL teachers co-teach to provide language support for ENL students. Best practice co-teaching models are utilized to ensure planning for coherent instruction in standards-aligned units and lessons occurs to benefit the diversity of students. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? We use the Spanish LAB test for newly entitled Spanish speaking students to determine their native language levels and SIFE status. Students have the option to take all Regents in their native languages with the exception of the ELA regents in January, June, or August. Most of our ENL students are Spanish speakers and may choose to take the Regents in Spanish. All content area, excluding the ELA Regents are translated. Students have to option to take the exams in the native language. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status In addition to the instructional modifications detailed below, all ELLs and former ELLs receive testing accommodations such as extended time, separate location, and access to a dictionary. a. While ensuring adherence to our ENL program models, SIFE students are mixed heterogeneously in core content classes. Our instructional plan for SIFE students includes effective programming to ensure students the courses needed and a path towards graduation, intensive differentiation within classes. As needed, they are provided with additional resources to help them catch up on any material missed. Teachers use differentiated instruction and scaffolding with individual students to level instruction and student work appropriately. SIFE students are encouraged to attend The Metropolitan High School’s after school tutoring and homework help program for additional support. Social and emotional support is provided through 4  advisories and counseling with the school social workers. b. Newcomers are mixed heterogeneously in classes as well. They are given native language resources, when available, to help them in content comprehension. Their assignments are modified to be appropriate to the English language level. If available, they work side by side with a more proficient English Language learner whom shares a common native language with the newcomer. Newcomers are also encouraged to attend the Metropolitan High School’s after school tutoring and homework help program. Graphic organizers and writing templates will be used to help students organize and develop emerging writing skills. Teachers will help students to build schema as a foundation for new language and content. Vocabulary development through the use of glossaries, word wall and Achieve 3000 or ILIT will be available as resources for ENL stand alone literacy instruction. c. English language learners that have been receiving services for 4-6 years are encouraged to attend after school tutoring and homework help at the Metropolitan High School. English language learners that have been receiving services for 4-6 years are given work that focuses on English reading and writing, according to the RLAT scores obtained through ATS. Administration and teachers recognize that there is a special challenge with long term ELLs and former ELLs. Our instructional approach serves to encourage language proficiency as well as to offer them opportunities to take advanced courses. Former and Long-term ELLs are identified for teachers so they can modify instruction appropriately; where appropriate and possible, these students also receive push-in support. Students are offered rigorous regents prep classes in Mathematics, Sciences, Social Studies and English Language Arts. Long Term ELLs are given access to NYS Regents preparation through Castle Learning (an online test prep system) to improve their performance on Regent exams. They also receive testing accommodations such as extended time, separate location, and access to a dictionary. Title III funded after school programs are also available. Former or commanding ELLs are accommodated based on the state requirement. They receive 90 minutes of integrated support in a content area class with a licensed content area and ENL teacher. They are also able to attend a after school NYS Regents Preparation through Castle Learning. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? ELL-SWDs are taught in heterogeneously mixed classes unless the IEP states that the student needs a self-contain class with a 15:1 student Special Educator ratio, where and ENL teacher also provides push-in support. When the IEP states a student should be in an ICT, the ENL, Special Education and content teacher use a variety of instructional strategies to make language and content comprehensible to students. This include an emphasis on differentiated instruction for the various learning groups within the proficiency levels. Scaffolding (graphic organizers, writing templates, modified writing prompts) is encouraged. Instruction is delivered within the on-line learning technologies are used to enhance the learning experience of students; Achieve 3000 is used to assist in the delivery of differentiated instruction; Castle learning is available for students to engage in test preparation. Through instructional feedback and professional learning, teachers are encouraged to use and design materials that support learning for ELLs and SWDs, including well designed graphic organizers, materials with visuals, scaffolded texts. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? ELL-SWDs are placed according to their language and IEP needs. They are serviced by Special Education teachers, as well as ESL teachers. ELL-SWDs are placed in the least restrictive environment in order to make classrooms as inclusive as possible. Most ELL-SWDs are placed in classes that adhere to the Integrated Collaborative Team (ICT) teaching model. They are mixed heterogeneously with peers that do not have learning disabilities. There are three teachers in the classroom--General Education teacher, Special Education teacher, ENL teacher. When a self-contained class is the least restrictive for the ELL-SWD, the self-contained class is serviced by the Special Education teacher as well as the ENL teacher. 5  8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. Targeted intervention for ELLs in ELA begins with individual and teacher team analysis of student learning gaps. Classroom strategies as interventions are generated, tried and monitored. Pull-aside groups are formed to differentiate instruction. ELLs are able to increase their own literacy skills through independent reading. Independent reading is done on a daily basis. ELA classrooms offer varied text of all levels and languages. HMH Collections offers scaffolds to support ELLs with CCLS-aligned content. Based on the student’s performance on the reading/writing modalities on the NYSESLAT, the student is encouraged to choose an appropriate independent book from the options of bilingual books, native language books, graphic novels and English novels. Currently, the classroom libraries contain books in English, Spanish, French and Arabic. The ELA teachers use differentiated instruction through supplemental texts and modified assignments to give the ELLs full support in the classroom. Content teachers are well aware of the ELLs and the levels of the ELLs in the class. Content teachers work with ESL teachers to learn new strategies for incorporating vocabulary and literacy into the math classes. History and Science classes are serviced by content teachers alongside ESL teachers to help ELLs succeed in content comprehension as well as their English language proficiency. Native language materials and resources are provided for students when available. ELLs are able to take the NYS Regents (with the exception of the ELA) in their native language. They are provided with a glossary for all NYS exams. All ELLs are encouraged to attend after school and designated Saturdays for homework help and tutoring. There is an ESL teacher whom conducts afterschool tutoring at least once a week that is fluent in Spanish and English; therefore can assist the native Spanish speakers with homework help in their native language. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? Trend from June 2016-2017 ELA and Algebra regents show that ENL students are in need of support in Reading and and Math. Targeting support in Math classes by pairing our ENL Teacher with 9 th and 10 th Grade Algebra; offering exams in students' native language. Incorporating ENL Strategies in all classes, and building teacher capacity to do so through PD. Currently, ENL students in grade 9 receive support in all ELA classes by a licensed English and a licensed ENL teacher. For the upcoming year, ENL teachers will co-facilitate Math classes. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? Metropolitan High School does not have a Bilingual Program 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. ELLs have equal access to all school programs including sports, town halls and any after school clubs. Announcements are made in English and Spanish notifying students of upcoming student activities. Town halls are done to highlight the diverse ethnic and cultural backgrounds of all our students. The Metropolitan High School uses Title III funding to support an ENL After school and select Saturday Academy for homework help and tutoring. The program is available Wednesday and Thursday from 2:30 to 4:30 after school. Attendance is encouraged through extra credit incentives and parental outreach. Content teachers give extra credit to students who stay to obtain additional support. SIFE and Long term ELLs are encouraged to participate in the after school tutoring services and extracurricular activities available to them. The Title III After school program provides ELLs homework assistance and tutoring in Mathematics, Science, History and English. ELLs reaching proficiency on the NYSESLAT are provided continual support through our program model and after school program. They continue to receive extended time on assessments, both state and teacher created for additional two years. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. The Metropolitan High School will continue our push-in and Collaborative Team Teaching by designated content area teachers to instruct our ELL population. This will provide a richer opportunity for collaboration with the ENL pedagogues. ENL teachers will be able to focus on more than one content area. The instructional materials used by our ELLs are as followed: 6  Technology is embedded in the ILIT program that is used with our students. This program allows students to engage in all of the four modalities of speaking, reading, reading, and writing. Students are able to use the the speaking portion to for better diction. They listen to the audio books in order to read with fluency and improve their reading comprehension. Furthermore, they use the electronic notebooks to take notes and write. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? We have Home Language support for Spanish students in our standalone ENL program, an ENL teacher is proficient in Spanish and several students are registered for AP Spanish and Literature courses. In content courses, teachers are encouraged to use translations, give extra time, and make dictionaries available to students, or pair them with students fluent in their language. Bilingual dictionaries/glossaries are available, where appropriate students are paired, and native language texts are used where possible. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. Required services support corresponds to ELLs through age appropriate supplemental materials. Supplemental resources for ELLs reflect high school grades and ages. An emphasis on curricula aligned to grade level CCLS ensures students are exposed to topics embedded in these materials. In ENL classes and ELA, New Language Arts Progressions (ESL/New Language) are used to ensure students are working at their readiness level, but ramping-up to meet grade levels standards. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? The Metropolitan High School does not share a building with another school. However, Metropolitan will continue our integrated and Collaborative Team Teaching by designated content area teachers to instruct our ELL population to meet their academic, linguistic, and socio emotional needs. This will provide a richer opportunity for collaboration with the ENL pedagogues. ENL teachers will be able to focus on more than one content area. The instructional materials used by our ELLs are as followed: 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). In August, all newly enrolled students, including newly enrolled ENL students at The Metropolitan High School must attend Summer Bridge, a three day orientation seminar, where they are informed of school policy and procedures. The program is run by the Math instructional lead, another content area teacher, an ENL teacher, a guidance counselor, and our parent coordinator. During this time, students are able to meet with some of their teachers, and classmates; and also get acclimated with the school environment. Writing and Mathematics samples are collected and are used as a preliminary means to identify the entry point of our students. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? Currently, Spanish is the only language elective offered to our students. ELL students who score high enough on a school wide Spanish assessment are placed in AP Spanish course. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? N/A 7  Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? All pedagogues at the Metropolitan High School are certified in their content area of specialty. The Metropolitan High School and the Borough Field Support Center offer a variety of professional learning opportunities for ELL personnel. These PD sessions are aligned to the goals and the needs of the school. ENL teachers participate in various workshops throughout the year offered by the Office of English Language Learners. PD is also offered based on the individual goals that are set by teachers. ENL personnel are required to participate in PD on differentiation strategies, co-teaching models and IILit. Teachers are encouraged to attend PD on the use of the Smart boards to make lesson more interactive. In continued efforts to facilitate the implementation of appropriate instructional methodologies for the improvement of outcomes on assessments in our ELL population, teachers will be asked to participate in staff development sessions and inter-visitations. The following are topics that continue to be discusses and implemented school-wide: Differentiated instruction: A teaching philosophy based on the premise that teachers should adapt instruction to meet the different needs in our classrooms. Teachers are learning to meet students varying readiness levels, learning preferences and interests. WITSI: A research based strategy that supports students in Hochman basic sentence-level writing strategies to result in writing of expanded sentences and well organized paragraphs that also evidences thinking. It enables teachers to evaluate students development in writing and content area concepts. iLit: A research-based, digital intervention is enhanced with explicit, point-of-use scaffolding, ELL strategies and content to support English language development so English learners, including long-term English learners, can: All teachers of ELLs are offered weekly PD in Department Teams and as a faculty with an instructional focus on component 3b, 3c, 3d of the Danielson Framework for Teaching. Part of that PD is ensuring that learning activities are differentiated for groups of students, including ELLs. Colleagues from the BFSC are providing support in co-teaching models that benefit ELLs. Non-pedagogues are trained on site and off site. The are supervised by two assistant principals. Paras are supervised by the assistant principal of special education; and the support staff is supervised by the assistant principal of school culture and administration. The assistant principals provide on- site training or send them to off training when required. Paras receive training weekly and their attendance is kept on file at the school. The deans, secretaries, parent coordinator, and school aids are trained weekly and agendas and attendance sheets are also kept on file at school. Additionally, they attend professional developments provided by the BFC. Before attending a professional development staff members complete a PD request form for approval. After attending a professional development all staff members are required to bring back a copy of the agenda. In some instances, the staff members will receive a certificate. In addition, the BFC will also come to the school train and work directly with staff members if necessary. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. The school has a weekly professional learning series focused on strengthening instruction. The School-Wide Instructional Focus (written as a Theory of Action) is: If teachers create a learning environment that is student-centered and provide students with meaningful feedback, then our students will engage in inquiry, high-level discussion, authentic writing, and engage in ongoing revision of work products that demonstrate a growth mindset. Therefore, PD focused student engagement 8  (3c) strong assessments (3d) opens avenues for differentiating instruction for ELLs and IEP students. Co-teaching models are supported through BFSC staff Finally, ENL teachers will design a series of sessions that specifically addresses learning needs to ELLs. Together these elements will compose the 7.5 hours of mandatory ELL training. ENL teachers also given multiple opportunities to engage in outside professional learning opportunities to meet the new mandates in CR Part 154.2, and then are encouraged to turn-key these leanings through department meetings. ENL teachers are available for co-planning with content teachers in order to make a more successful learning environment for all students. As of this year 2017-2018, ENL teachers attend at least three professional development training through the Bronx Borough Field support with ELL specialists. ENL teachers meet together bimonthly, develop strategies to help content teachers, and alternate weeks to share these strategies with content area teachers through bimonthly meetings and Google docs. The four ENL teachers share their strategies with the math, science, English, and social studies departments. The following PD are planned by ENL teachers and are shared with all teachers. The titles include: ENL students work, Looking at the NYSESLAT Results, Strategies of ENL students, Meeting the Needs of ENL in the Content Areas, Identifying ELLs with Disabilities. The ENL teachers satisfies more than 50% of ELL-specific professional development for ENL/Bilingual teachers as per CR Part 154.2; and the school provides more the 15% ELL specific professional development for all teachers as per CR Part 154.2. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? Our ENL teachers and support teachers where appropriate will use the newly created Parent Engagement time to meet with ELL parents to discuss the goals of the program, their child’s language development progress, their child’s English language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas. One ENL teacher is proficient in the home language of the vast majority of our students, the other teachers will receive support where necessary. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. ELL Parent involvement is highly encouraged. Our Parent Coordinator is bilingual and present at all parent meetings. The parent coordinator is active and present during parent orientation for our newly enrolled ELL students. She reaches out to parents whenever needed. There is a parent log in the main office that is managed and kept by our parent coordinator. The coordinator helps make calls to ensure that parents attend The mandated Parent Conference. The parent coordinator conducts a series of Parent Workshops that includes Zumba, Art classes, and Nutrition for Health and Wellness. Furthermore, The Metropolitan High School has elected a new PA president for the school year 2017-1018. The board meets on regular basis, monthly. Records are kept with on file at school with the parent coordinator. Our PA by-laws are now readily available in Spanish, and we have actively recruited parents of ELLs for our PA through translated newsletter. Some other efforts we are implementing: translators present at each Parent Teacher conference, continuing to use translated mailings, and using technology to reach out with translated documents and allow parents who can't make it to still contact us/stay updated via Twitter, Facebook, and email. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. N/A 9  0 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Ms. Lydia Cordero; Dr. Latoya Key, Dr. Natacha Seignon, Ms. Michelle Noonan, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 1  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: Metropolitan High School School DBN: 12x248 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Dr. Latoya Key Title Principal Ms. Lydia Cordero Assistant Principal Ms. Araseli Pena Parent Coordinator Mr. Matthew Messmer ENL/Bilingual Teacher Ms. Niurka Artiles Parent Mr. Raymond Hofmiller Teacher/Subject Area Mr. Marcus Potts Teacher/Subject Area Mr. Travis Combs Ms. Anita Bushi Coach Coach Ms. Nancy Hilario School Counselor Mr. Michael Alcoff Mr. Wladimir Pierre Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist, District 11 and 12 Mr. Jose Soto Other ENL Teacher Ms. Larissa Rosa Other ENL Teacher Ms. Kathleen Bailey Other ENL Teacher Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 09/26/18 09/26/18 09/26/18 09/26/18 09/26/18 09/26/18 09/26/18 09/26/18 09/26/18 09/26/18 09/26/18 09/26/18 09/26/18 09/26/18 09/26/18 2  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 12x248 School Name: Metropolitan High School Superintendent: Michael Alcoff The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Lydia Cordero Assistant Principal No Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. Upon first arrival at our school and as the HLIS is administered, parents are asked what is their preferred language of communication. We use any ATS data to help in determining a preferred language. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral English, Wolof, Slovak, TWI Spanish, English Spanish, English TWI - 0 Slovak - 0 Wolof - .25 English - 62.36 French - .74 3  TWI - .12 Slovak - .12 Wolof - .25 English - 62.12 French - .74 French, Arabic, English, Arabic English - 62.12 Spanish Bengali, Spanish, English Spanish - 36.16 English Bengali - .49 English Spanish English English - 62.36 Spanish - 36.16 Bengali - .49 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. N/A Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families After school announcements, Parent Teacher Conference Announcement, As needed Disciplinary code, report card distribution NYS testing, curriculum night annoucenments As needed college-prep activities. As needed Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. Translations will be provided through the assistance of the bilingual parent coordinator as well as the DOE translation unit. These documents will be translated in time to be available or mailed out simultaneously with the English notifications Translations will be provided through the assistance of the bilingual parent coordinator as well as the DOE translation unit. These documents will be translated in time to be available or mailed out simultaneously with the English notifications Translations will be provided through the assistance of the bilingual parent 4  Senior Year announcements, announcement As needed coordinator as well as the DOE translation unit. These documents will be translated in time to be available or mailed out simultaneously with the English notifications Translations will be provided through the assistance of the bilingual parent coordinator as well as the DOE translation unit. These documents will be translated in time to be available or mailed out simultaneously with the English notifications 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide Parent-teacher conferences 4 per year Community Forum 1 per year Coffee Talk 1 per month Home Language Intake Upon student enrollment interpretation service(s)? Bilingual staff members are on hand to aid parents with translation services. Technology is also used in the form of translators. During this event, all Powerpoint presentations offer Spanish translations. Also, several bilingual staff members are present, including the parent coordinator and other faculty members who can help translate for visiting parents, family members, and members of the community. Coffee Talk is a forum where parents and other family members may meet the principal and discuss important school-related issues. Bi-lingual staff members such as the parents coordinator are present at this monthly meeting in order to provide translations of the issues focused on during the discussion. Newly enrolled students and family members are greeted by a certified bilingual ESL teacher who can help them through the process of home language identification. 5  3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. In the event of an emergency, all school parents are notified. Bilingual faculty members as well as the DOE Translation and Interpretation Unit (language line) provide immediate notification in the family's preferred language. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. All staff members will be provided with a copy of Chancellor's Regulation A-663, as well as copy of the Bill of Parent Rights and Responsibilities. Furthermore, all staff members will be informed of the translation services provided by both the school and the DOE (Translation and Interpretation Unit) as a whole and how to access these services. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) A copy of the Bill of Parent Rights and Responsibilities will be made available to all parents and family members so that they are fully aware of the services they are entitled to. This document will be available at all parent teacher conferences and other face-to-face meetings and the document will be available in all nine of the covered languages that are represented in the student body. Furthermore, this letter will also be mailed home to all family members. Lastly, notification of these rights will be posted in school lobby in plain sight of all visiting family members. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? We are creating a survey available in all covered languages that parents can complete both in the building and on-line. Parent Teacher night will provide a platform for parents to offer such feedback. Additionally, the bilingual parent coordinator will administer the survey to parents before they depart. 6 
