 12X271 School Name: EAST BRONX ACADEMY FOR THE FUTURE Principal: SARAH SCROGIN 2018-19 CEP-CS 1  Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC)   School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information East Bronx Academy for the Future 12x271 School Number (DBN): 321200012271 6-12 1716 SouthernBoulevardBronxNY 10460 718-861-8639 Fax: sscrogin@eastbronxacademy.org Email Address: 718-861-8641 Phone Number: Sarah Scrogin School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Sarah Scrogin Tracy Tarter Chenoa Petties Nicholas Lawrence Jody Perez Nyjhel White Christopher Melendez ShakieaWilliams District Information Geographical District: 12 RichardCintron Superintendent: 335 Adams Street Brooklyn, NY 11201 Superintendent’s Office Address: rcintro@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718-923-5124 Phone Number: 718 935-2246 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC)   Affinity FSC: Executive Director’s Office Address: Alexandra Anormalizada Executive Director: 131 Livingston Street, Brooklyn, NY aanorma@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 718 935 5618 Phone Number: 718 935-2246 Fax:   Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Sarah Scrogin, staff Tracy Tarter, staff ChinoaPetties, parent n/a Jody Perez, parent Dylan Hiraman, student Eric Odom, staff Steven Brady, staff Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative Teacher Member/ AP   Name Linda Wilson, parent LatishaDennis, paret Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Parent Parent Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/   Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with   the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement   Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? East Bronx Academy (EBA) for the Future is a Communtiy School in partnership with Phipps Neighborhoods. EBA works to prepare all of our students for the best possible future by preparing them for college and the world of work.   2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. We are working to increase college readiness. We are also focused on attendance and on-time arrival. We are partnered with with Teachers College Reading and Writing Project. We are committed to addressing social-emotional needs, especially via our work with our Community School partner Phipps Neighborhoods. We also have a strong commitment to our alumni, many of whom continue to work in the school or our partner organizations while attending college and after graduating from college. Much of our best work over the last 14 years – and this past school year -- has been made possible through state and Centrally-funded initiatives, including Community Schools (AIDP & CSGI), the Innovation Zone (iLearn and iZone360), the Expanded Success Initiative, and the Mentoring for Real Program (OSYD). This year we added AP for All and College Access for All. Our instructional focus in outlined in our “EBA Starts.” We believe that by using these shared instructional strategies in all of our classrooms, students and teachers will know what is expected in each class period and, more importantly in the context of Adult Learning, teachers will be able to received feedback from administrators, mentors and colleagues how to modify instructional strategies to increase learning. We emphasize the Danielson Framework for Teaching in our “EBA Starts,” which remind teachers of our priorities: • Teach students the skills they need to master tasks independently now and for the FUTURE. • Figure out what students CAN do and teaching into the next level of the skill on which you’re focusing. • Give students the bulk of the period (30 minutes or more) to practice worthy objectives related to reading, writing, discussion and mathematical modeling. • Check for understanding and re-teach as needed. • Make sure students (not teachers) are the ones doing the work and making meaning. • Praise students and build positive relationships with them by inviting them to engage intellectually and emotionally in learning and life. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. We strive to keep as many of our students as possible from middle through high school and we actively recruit students from our local neighborhood, the poorest Congressional district in our nation. We are not content with the fact that some of our highest-risk students take longer to graduate, and we are committed to raising expectations for our students by doubling the amount of time they spend in math and English classes. We have 109 ELLs and former ELL's, 196 students with Individualized Education plans, 86 students in temporary housing and as well as approximately 167 students overage or under-credited for their grade. Our focus on serving all students means that we work with some of the most at-risk students in our city, a high percentage of who are in the bottom third city-wide. We also welcome and make progress with many students with disabilities, including partnering for 10 years with our fully-inclusive District 75 program from 75x168 as part of City-Wide Inclusion. We continue to need to improve course pass rates and attendance as well as proficiency levels for all grades, especially middle-schoolers, special education and English Language Learners. We are committed to meeting these students needs AND increasing their college readiness as well as that of their peers. 0  4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. We made progress with regard to Trust, Supportive Environment, Collaborative Teachers, Effective School Leadership & Strong Family-Community Ties, all of which were "Well-Developed" in our most recent Quality Review (March 2017). Trust was, in fact, an area of celebration. Our key areas for focus for the 2017 - 2018 school year is Rigorous Instruction, which includes, the Instructional Core (1.1, 1.2, 2.2) for which we received only "Proficient" ratings. Specifically, the Quality Reviewer gave us an Area of Focus for 2.2, which reads, "Align assessments to curricula, use on-going assessment and grading practices, and analyze information on student learning outcomes to adjust instructional decisions at the team and classroom levels." This is our main focus this year, and all of the goals and action plans in this Comprehensive Education Plan are related to that focus. We are also, of course, working on other areas where we scored only "proficient" including 1,1 Ensure engaging, rigorous and coherent curricula in all subjects and 1.2 Develop teacher pedagogy from a coherent set of beliefs about how students learn best." 1  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 12X271 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 06,07,08,09,10,11,12 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 671 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 79 77 8 14 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 111 91 8 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 92.0% % Attendance Rate 88.7% % Reduced Lunch 15.1% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.9% 70.0% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 0.9% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 14.25 6% 8% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 23.4% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation 80% 73% 76.3% 3.1% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A NO N/A NO YSH Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A NO N/A NO NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A NO N/A N/A YES High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A NO N/A N/A NO Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A NO N/A N/A NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A YES N/A YES YES No N/A 79 79 84.1% 3.3% 28.9% 25.8% 1.8% 1.5% 2 64% 6.8 15.3% N/A 78% 76% 67.7% 21% N/A No No YES N/A N/A N/A NO NO N/A N/A N/A NO YES N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A NO N/A N/A N/A N/A NO N/A N/A N/A N/A YES 2  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. During our PPO's during the 2017 - 2018 school year Superintendent Mendez and PLF Schneider also recommended greater use of lesson study approaches in team meetings and better use of a data management and portfolio system to track students' mastery. Currnetly just 38% of students show mastery on the CUNY benchmarks. Among our most pressing needs are: - Increase consistency across classrooms of the use of the EBA Mastery Learning approach. - Develop/adopt a management system for tracking students' mastery - - Improve collaboration within and across grades and subjects to especially with regard to student mastery - Continue to refine on-going assessment and grading practices to emphasize and reward students’ progress toward mastery and better help students and parents understand, measure and track this progress. We also looked closely at our college readiness and credit accumulation data and are committed to closing the gap between our graduation rate and our college readiness. This year for cohort 2019 we went from 23% to 47% college readiness and increased credit accumulation in grade 9 by about 10% (81% vs. 72% in prior year). Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June, 2019, 50% of cohort 2019 will meet the CUNY College and Career Readiness standards in both ELA and math. 3  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Students with Disabilities will receive intensive support from our School Implementation Team. English Language Learners will receive support via Quality Teaching for English Language Learner (QTEL) strategies. Teachers will enroll in Professional development specifically focused on English Language Learners at TCRWP. Students in Temporary Housing and/or Chronically Absent Students will be partnered with Success Mentors Over-Age or Under-Credited Students will enroll in Achieve Now Academy AND be partnered with a Success Mentor 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Students with Disabilities English Language Learners Students in Temporary Housing Weekly September 2018– June 2019 Weekly September 2018– June 2019 Weekly September 2018 – June 2019 Over-Age or Under-Credited Students Daily August 2018 – July 2019 Principal & Assistant Principals, Lead and All Teachers, School Implementation Team ELL and general education teachers Principal & Assistant Principals, Lead and Model Teachers (Grade Team Leaders) Community School Team Staff Community School Team Staff How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Parents are being engaged and empowered via monthly meetings with Principal Scroign and others. They are empowered by becoming Parent Ambassadors. Principal Scrogin, AP Brady, Parent Coordinator Johnson and Acting Community School Director Shakiea Williams will conduct regular parent meetings and outreach to teach parents about College Readiness as well as Rigorous Instruction and the Common Core so that they better understand mastery learning and the importance . This includes training by WestED in partnership the Office of Family and Community Engagement (FACE) in Academic Parent Teacher Teas (APTT) which we are implementing for the first time in 2017 - 2018. We have daily parent meetings on an as-needed basis as well as weekly Kid Talks in which parents (and when appropriate) students participate and we have monthly Parent Ambassador meetings. 4  Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Mastery Collaborative Academic Parent Teacher Teams Teachers College Reading and Writing Project Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind X Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, 50% of students will have portfolios. We monitor progress quarterly at our Leadership Team meetings and ask all teachers to complete a mid-year self-assessment on the Danielson Rubric and to reflect on their progress toward goals and set/adjust goals for spring term. All teaches participate in mid-year reviews culminating in a whole-school progress monitoring and goal setting session on February 1st. We then repeat the cycle in spring term, culminating in year-end reviews and reflection beginning the week of June 8th. We also look closely at parent surveys and, thanks to FACE, we are also tracking this data in the Voter Action Network (VAN) for the first time this year. We also use Kinvolved for parent communication and track that data. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) January Regents Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 5  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? In our most recent school survey, only 72% of those surveyed responded postively to questions about the school environment. While 82% of students said they feel safe just 59% said that teachers support them when they are upset. We hypothesize thatthis leads to attendance issues. Our attendance was 79% and chornic absenteeism 60% in 2016-17 and 84% and 50% in 2017-2018, so we are making progress. We have school structures and culture are designed to create a safe and inclusive school culture where high expectations are regularly communicated to students, staff and families, but we need to refine and strengthen them. These structures include a Community Schools Team, Grade Team meetings, a Justice Team, a , a Kid Talk protocol, and others. We have made strides over the past few years, and our most recent 2016-2017 Quality Review acknowledged this an area of celebration, finding us well-developed in terms of our ability to meet students' needs and move them up levels. In the feedback conference she said, that our Kid Talks show that teachers and kids know one another very well and that teachers, advisors, and staff work together make decisions about kids academic AND social emotional needs to help them move up levels. Still, we have far to go in this area, especially to increase college and career readiness and perseverance in college. (Reducing suspensions and incidents is also crucial.) Many of our students are in need of more extensive support in terms of health, mental health and emotional support than we are currently providing. In partnership with Phipps Neighborhoods and have partnered with ESI, OSYD and Partnership With Children to improve our school culture and better meet students’ needs. We want to take a similar approach around college readiness, partnering with A-LIst to do SAT prep and use ideas and resources from AP for All and College Access for All to leverage this work. We are also participating in the New Visions Bridge to College program. Over the past several years, we’ve on creating a culture of learning by instituting a Restorative Practices approach to school discipline based on the work of Dr. Stuart Ablon and Astor Center for Children and Families. We received support from the Office of Safety and Youth Development via the Mentoring for Real Program to train our teachers in restorative practices, including restorative circles and collaborative problem solving. Many of our teachers are certified in these approaches and we plan to continue this professional development work until all teachers have been reached. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the 6  identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Specific Goal: By June 2019, we will have improved the attendance rate of students in the 80 - 89% range by 5% and reduced chronic absenteeism by 50%. (This goal is for students within last year's 80-89% range.) 7  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? We have assigned a staff of Success Mentors to work with students in the 80 - 89% attendance range. Whole school & community We initiated a Grade Team protocol aimed at sorting students into both academic (based on Skedula grades) and attendance (based on New Visions portal attendance "Heat Map" then assigned ALL students to Advisors for daily outreach based on those groups. Middle school ELA and Math Tier 1 Students January 2018 – June 2019 Principal, Partner , CS Director, CS Staff, Parent Coordinator September 2018 – June 2019 Principal, AP, SASF Director, SASF Staff, Grade Team Leaders We have added addtional supports for stuents below 70%, especially those in temporary housing or over-aged/under credited, SIFE, etc which includes working daily with our Community School team, enrolling in Achieve Now Academy, and in MANY case, enrolling parents, siblings and guardians in Adult Education Classes paid for by OACE and taught right here in our school building! June 2016 - June 2019 SWD, SIFE, Over-Age, Under-Credited, STH We are leveraging our partnership with Computer Science for All to build a computer science strand from grade 6 - 12 with a goal of engaging students we have not traditionally engaged well. CSLT January 2018 - June 2019 Community School Director, Community School Team, Administration, Guidance, Achieve Now staff, OACE staff Attendance, Guidance, Administration, Community School Team, All Teachers 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. We will partner with Phipps Neighborhoods and Astor Center for Children & Families to conduct monthly parent workshops and trainings around supportive school environment via our Parent Ambassadors Program. This is a parent-led program inspired by our Community Schools work. Parents and FACE staff teach leadership and empowerment skills and then do parent and family outreach and run monthly workshops for parents. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 8  - CS Director & CS Staff - SASF Director and Staff (21 st Century grant funded) - Astor Center for Children and Families Social Worker (CS funded) - AP for All Peer Collaborative Teacher & AP for all Teachers - College Access for All - Computer Science for All Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Tax Levy C4E X X Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. We will use ATS attendance reports and the New Visions Portal's Attendance Heat Map to measure improvements in targeted students' attendance mid-year. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. New Visions Sorter Attendance Heat Map CASS ATS Community School Attendance Team Meeting Minutes Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 9  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Our Framework for Great Schools report and Quality Review indicate that we are effective with regard to “Collaborative Teachers.” This is good, as we have been working hard, in collaboration with our curricular partners, to improve instructional strategies and practices as measured by the Danielson Rubric and aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards. The majority of our teachers were effective, but we do have some developing in some areas, and we have work to do in this element. On our 2016 - 2017 School Survey, 86% of those surveyed responded postively to questions about Collaborative Teachers, with 95% of teachers saying they work together to design instructional programs, 95% saying they have opportunities to work productiely with colleagues, but just 81% of teachers saying that teachers feel responsible for all students learning. We noted in particularly that Students With Disabilities and English Languge Learners lagged behind general education students with regard to GPA. During the 2018 - 2019 school year we worked closely with the Mastery Collaborative to develop performance tasks, revised our grading policy to be mastery based, and begin to plan for the creation a student portfolio system, which were recommendations from PPO and SQR visits as well as teacher teams. Teams of teacher created and reviewed tasks together, and we agreed to continue this work in 2018, with a focus on increasing students mastery beyond proficient. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 75% of students -- including English Language Learners and Students With Disabilities - will be Proficient or Advanced based on their grades average in Skedula/PupilPath. 0  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Teachers are organized in grade and subject area teams with 2.5 hours each of collaborative planning/professional development time via our PROSE schedule. This work is led by Peer Collaborative and Model Teachers. English Language Learners September 2018 – June 2019 We selected only highly effective or proficient rated teachers to teach Achieve Now classes for over-age under credited students. Over-Age Under Credited Students September 2017 – June 2019 We revised our grading policy and strengthened our weekly monitoring protocol of students' mastery using PupilPath based on teachers' mastery based grades. For 2018 - 2019, we are adding a focus on GPA to that weekly conversation. All Students September 2017 – June 2018 We adopted a series of differentiated standards-based I Can statements to help scaffold students work and thereby increase mastery. All Students September 2017 – June 2019 TCRWP Coach, Metamorphosis Coach, Assistant Principal for Instruction, Lead Teachers Model Teacher & Algebra, Chemistry, Computer Science and Physics Teachers Principal, AP’s, Lead and Model Teachers, All Teachers, CS Team All Teachers 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. We will work with Metamorphosis & TC coaches to plan quarterly Parent Trainings and parent will attend the TCRWP parent workshops. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. We have a special schedule via PROSE for teacher Professional Development. Lead teachers have release time for instructional coaching. Lead and Model Teacher receive salary increments as per DOE/UFT memorandum. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. 1  X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. We monitor progress quarterly at our Leadership Team meetings and ask all teachers to complete a mid-year self-assessment on the Danielson Rubric (3d) and to reflect on their progress toward goals and set/adjust goals for spring term. Our mid-year reviews began the week of December 1 th and will run through January 30 th , culminating in a whole-school progress monitoring and goal setting session in the 1 st week of February. Lesson plans will reflect teachers' collaboration from grade and subject area team meetings. We will track Danielson Component 3d. Teachers also complete quarterly "Failure Analyses" and meet with the principal or assistant principal to plan for students success. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. MOTP Tracker from Advance (offline school) and New Visions google apps Teacher Evaluation System (3d) 3.03 Protocol from Skedula Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Our Quality Review, Framework for Great Schools Report, and our Needs Assessment found that this is an area in which we are well-developed or effective. Our Superintendent recommended we focus on 3.4 "Strengthen the development of a supportive learning environment that conveys high expectations to students, teachers and parents through regular and open communication that positively impacts college and career goals." This fits with our internal needs assessments, which find a disconnect between parents understandings of what students need to achieve success and what school staff believe. We've implemented several strategies aimed at closing this gap this year. As of the June 2018 Regents, we had 54% of cohort 2018 meet the CUNY benchmark in algebra and 48% meet the English benchmark, for a combined readiness of 38% overall. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Effective School Leadership Goal: Specific Goal: Improve the Effectiveness of School leadership so that we continue to close the gap between our graduation rate and our college readiness rate while continuing to increase the graduation rate to 90 or higher by 2020. 3  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). In partnership with the DOE's Mastery Collaborative all teachers will switch to Common Core-aligned "I Can" statements for grading. We added College Access for All, Academic Parent Teacher Team and AP4All to increase rigor and college readiness. We are adding Computer Science for All this year. We differentiated our I Can statements across grades and provided scaffolding and other forms of universal design approaches, and we are developing a portfolio system to better track them and celebrate student work. We added Achieve Now Academy programming. August 2017 – June 2019 Administration, Leadership Team, Lead and Model Teachers August 2017 – June 2019 Tuesdays 3:15 – 4:15, August 2014 – June 2015 August 2017 – June 2019 Tuesday 8:30 - 9:30 SIT meeting August 2018 – June 2019 Bi-monthly July 2017 – July 2018 All teachers, Assistant Principal, Teacher Team Leaders All Students, Peer Collaborative Teacher, Assistant Principal Students with Disabilities, English Language Learners, Assistant Principal Over-Age, Under- Credited Students, Lead Teachers 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. We review our Leadership progress at each SLT and Leadership meeting and hold monthly Parent Ambassador trainings. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment 4  Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Administrative Team (Principal, Instructional AP, Organizational AP) New Visions for Public Schools Support Organization Coach Career Pathway Teachers PROSE Model Teachers + Office of Teacher Leadership Coaching 1.5 Hours Weekly Professional Development for Leadership Team Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E X Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. We monitor progress quarterly at our Leadership Team meetings and ask all teachers to complete a mid-year self-assessment and year-end on the Danielson Rubric and to reflect on their progress toward goals and set/adjust goals for spring term. We wiil review students' progress on interim assessments and via January Regents scores. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. January Regents Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 5  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. The Framework for Great Schools report indicates this as an area in which we are developing. Our Quality Reviewer said that she thought we are making progress in this areas. We are a Community School in partnership with Phipps Neighborhoods. We have identified many areas in which we need additional work and support for our students and community. Among the most pressing needs are: - College and Career Readiness & Connections to Work Opportunities - Extra-Curricular Programming & Enrichment Activities - Medical and Mental Health Support - Language and Technology Classes The Superintendent recommended: Strengthening staff teamwork around a shared theory of action that informs:  student support services around guidance/advisement, social-emotional learning, and child development  opportunities for faculty, parent, and student voices in attendance improvement efforts. One promising practice is joining the DOE's AP for All and College Access for All initiatives. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Specific Goal: By June 2019, 100 percent of students and families will have engaged in at least one Community School initiative aimed at strengthening family and community ties, especially with regard to closing the gap between graduation and college readiness. This will be measured by the notes made by each student's name in the New Visions Portal. (In other words, we will take the total number of studnets whose parents engage and divide by total enrollment to calculate a percentage of parent engagement.) 6  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? We continue to partner with Phipps Neighborhoods and Sports and Arts Foundation to provide meaningful programming to students and families, which will bring in families for workshops, meetings and information sessions. All students January 2014 – June 2018 We are partnered with VESID, TOPS, Co-Op Tech and others to make sure our students with disabilities successfully transition to college and career. These programs bring in parents for workshops, meetings and information sessions. Students with Disabilities June 2016 - June 2017 Principal, Partner Organization Staff, Community School Director, Parent Coordinator, CS Staff Principal, Partner Organization Staff, Community School Director, Parent Coordinator, CS Staff Parent Coordinator, Community Partners Ongoing Ongoing AP for Organization, Coaches We continue to parntner with WestED for QTEL and Academic Parent Teacher Conferences and to work Closely with TCRWP on moving our ELL's reading, writing and speaking proficiency. These programs bring in parents for workshops, meetings and information sessions, including Saturday sessions. English Language Learners We are offering Achieve Now Academy this year and including over-age, under credited students in college visits our college seminar and other college awareness including, in the middle school, College Access for All programming. These programs bring in parents for workshops, meetings and information sessions. Over-Age Under Credited Students 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. We are partnering with Phipps Neighborhoods as well as SASF, AP4All, Academic Parent Teacher Teams (FACE), College Access for All to increase family and community engagement, particularly around attendance and college readiness. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 7  We adjusted our schedule to better accommodate professional development and youth development in partner with our community school partners this year. We’ve added and/or maintained significant human resources including Community School Director and Staff. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Tax Levy C4E X Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. We monitor progress around attendance, participation and justice monthly at our School Leadership Team meetings , culminating in a whole-school progress monitoring and goal setting session on February 2 nd , which will monitor progress toward our goal of 90 percent engagement with a Community School program. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. New Visions Portal Note Section Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 8  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Mathematics Science Social Studies Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) High School: Below grade level reading and/or not yet passed Regents Middle School: Level 1 on test and/or did not make 3 levels reading progress on Fountas & Pinell Running Record High School: Below grade level mathematics and/or not yet passed Regents Middle School: Level 1 on test and/or did not make 3 levels progress on Performance Series High School: Did not yet passed Regents; or failing core subject Middle School: Poor performance on MOSL and/or course grades High School: Did not yet passed Regents; or failing core subject Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Small Group and/or One-to-One Small Group and/or One-to-One After School & During School Day Math fluency (e.g. Great Leaps), strategy building, etc Push in, small group, One-to-One After School & During School Day Tutoring, small group instruction Push in, small group, One-to-One After School & During School Day Tutoring, small group instruction Small Group and/or One-to-One After School & During School Day 9  Middle School: Poor performance on MOSL and/or course grades High School: Below grade level reading and/or not yet passed Regents At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Guided Reading, Reading Plus fluency builder, Wilson, Rewards, Great Leaps, QTEL Push in, small group, One-to-One After School & During School Day Middle School: Level 1 on test and/or did not make 3 levels reading progress on Fountas & Pinell Running Record 0  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 67 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. Phipps Housing assistance, clothing, tutoring, and basic emergency supplies Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). n./a 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 1  n/a 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. n/a 2  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. We are dedicated to recruiting, retaining and supporting high quality teachers for our students. Among the ways that we do this are by: ● Maintaining a Hiring Team and Focusing on High Quality Hires We have a carefully calibrated hiring process that goes from phone screens to demo lessons to “wooing” high quality teachers to work at our school. Many of the best members of school staff as well as students and parents participate in this process, which is intended to get the best possible teachers to work with our students. We are committed to continuing our hiring and retention strategies with the goal of recruiting and retaining HQT's. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). Providing team-based and external professional development and support We have intensive team-based and external professional development opportunities. Our teachers participate in at least five-hours per week of “common planning” in subject area and grade teams, in which they are supported by lead teachers and team members in working toward individual teacher and teacher team goals. We also provide external coaches and professional development opportunities (e.g. Teachers College, AVID, QTEL, CUNY MSP, New Visions LDC and A2i, and many more). Teachers receive extensive mentoring and support. They meet regularly in a new teacher group run by fellow teachers and they work regularly with their assigned mentors, including the mentor watching their class and giving feedback aligned to Danielson. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. 3  n/a 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). n/a Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). n/a 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. We have a MOSL Committee and we discuss assessment regularly at our School Leadership Team meetings. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Column B Verify with an (X) Section Reference(s) 4  Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 580,626 0 12,366 0 5,122,489 x n/a x n/a x 18 n/a 25 n/a 22 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and 5  achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 6  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy East Bronx Academy for the Future Parent Involvement policy This policy was put together in conjunction with the elected parent board members and presented to the general parent association members at the June 2018 meeting to be edited or voted on. Parent involvement means the participation of parents in regular, two-way, and meaningful communication involving student academic learning and other school activities, including ensuring:  That parents play an integral role in assisting their child’s learning;  That parents are encouraged to be actively involved in their child’s education at school and home;  That parents are full partners in their child’s education and are included, as appropriate, in decision-making and are on advisory committees to assist in the education of their child; the carrying out of other activities, such as those described in section 1118 pf the ESSA. Description of How School Will Implement Required Parental Involvement Policy Components 7  1. East Bronx Academy for the Future will take the following actions to involve parents in the joint development of its parent involvement plan under section 1112 of the ESSA: In the 2018-2019 school year we will conduct several community meetings, send out constant communications in the forms of letters, postcards, newsletters, calendars, phone calls, text and or e-mails in order to get notification out to parents. 2. East Bronx Academy for the Future will take the following actions to involve parents in the process of school review and improvements under section 116 of ESSA: In the 2018-2019 school year we will conduct a PASS review with parents present, at least three different learning walks to have parents involved with the process of qualitative assessment of instruction in our school. The school will also help with the facilitation and the distribution of the learning environment surveys. This will allow the school to have parents give qualitative assessment of instruction, safety, and culture of the school. 3. East Bronx Academy for The Future will provide the following necessary coordination, technical assistance, and other support in planning and implementing effective parental involvement activities to improve student academic achievement and school performance: Parents will be notified through a monthly calendar, newsletter, letters, flyers, e-mails, text and phone calls as to the date and time of meetings and workshops to address the implementation of any programs that school has to offer. 4. East Bronx Academy for the Future will coordinate and integrate Title 1 parental involvement strategies with parental involvement strategies: Monthly parent workshops will be provided for all parents to develop knowledge of instructional program, assessments for city and state standards, Chancellor’s Promotional Policy, and student Code of Conduct. There will also be provided with workshops that target specific parents such as, ELL and IEP workshops. 5. East Bronx Academy for the Future will take the following actions to conduct, with the involvement of parents, an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of the parental involvement policy in improving school quality. The evaluation will include identifying barriers to greater participation by parents in parental involvement activities (with particular attention to parents who are economically disadvantaged, are disabled, have limited English proficiency, have limited literary, or are of any racial or ethic minority background). The school will use the revise, if necessary (and with the involvement of parents) its parental involvement policies. Parental Involvement will occur through attendance at Annual Fall Back – to – School night to present and discuss curriculum expectations. There will be a 6th and 9th grade orientation in the summer to prepare incoming parents and students on the expectations and responsibilities of the families. The school will also provide training programs for parent volunteers for the classroom and lunchroom. The parents association will facilitate fundraising events to support student achievement. We will also provide pilot programs for parents as reading partners. The school is equipped with wheel chair associability and elevator assess. 6. East Bronx Academy for the Future will build the schools’ and parent’s capacity for strong parental involvement, in order to ensure effective involvement of parents and to support a partnership with the parents, and the community to improve student academic achievement, through the following activities specifically described below: 8  1. The school will provide assistance to parents of children served by the school, as appropriate, in understanding topics such as the following, by undertaking the actions described in this paragraph – i. the State’s academic content standards ii.the State’s student academic achievement standards iii.the State and local academic assessments including alternate assessments, the requirements of Part A, how to monitor their child’s progress, and how to work with educators: workshops, conferences, classes, both in-State and out-of-State, including any equipment or other materials that may be necessary to ensure success. 2. The school will provide materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their children’s academic achievement, such as literacy training, and using technology, as appropriate, to foster parental involvement, by: Parents will receive progress reports through their children, through the mail and by using Skedular on a monthly bases. This will give them a clear view of where their children are before they receive their report cards. Training workshops will be provided to help parents access their child’s information on line, through skedular, from their homes, local libraries or businesses. Parents will share responsibilities for student performance through attending Parent/Teacher Conferences, School Leadership Meetings, and Family Support and Intervention Conferences. Discretionary School Parental Involvement Policy Components The school Parental Involvement Policy may include additional paragraphs listing and describing other discretionary activities that the schools, in consultation with its parents, choose to undertake to build parents’ capacity for involvement in the school and school system to support their children’s academic achievement, such as the following discretionary activities listed under section 118(e) of the ESSA:  Involving parents in the development of training for teachers, principals, and other educators to improve the effectiveness of that training;  Providing necessary literacy training for parents from Title 1, Part A funds, if the school district has exhausted all other reasonably available sources of funding for that training;  Providing necessary literacy training for parents from Title 3, funds, to those parents of English Language Learners, if the school has exhausted all other reasonably available sources of funding for that training.  Paying reasonable and necessary expenses associated with parental involvement activities, including transportation and child care costs, to enable parents to participate in school related meetings and training sessions;  Training parents to enhance the involvement of other parents;  In order to maximize parental involvement and participation in their children’s education, arranging school meetings at a variety of times, or conducting in-home conferences between teachers or other educators, who work directly with participating children, with parents who are unable to attend those conferences at school;  Provide translation at meetings and to any materials that are distributed to parents;  Adopting and implementing model approaches to improving parental involvement;  Developing relationships with community based organizations in the community that will provide resources for parental involvement. This includes but is not limited to faith-based organizations;  Provide other reasonable support for parental involvement activities under section 1118 as parents may request. 9  ___ ● Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students East Bronx Academy for the Future Parent involvement policy This policy was put together in conjunction with the elected parent board members and presented to the general parent association members. Parent involvement means the participation of parents in regular, two-way, and meaningful communication involving student academic learning and other school activities, including ensuring:  That parents play an integral role in assisting their child’s learning;  That parents are encouraged to be actively involved in their child’s education at school and home;  That parents are full partners in their child’s education and are included, as appropriate, in decision-making and are on advisory committees to assist in the education of their child; the carrying out of other activities, such as those described in section 1118 pf the ESSA. Description of How School Will Implement Required Parental Involvement Policy Components 1. East Bronx Academy for the Future will take the following actions to involve parents in the joint development of its parent involvement plan under section 1112 of the ESSA: In the 2013-2014 school year we will conduct several community meetings, send out constant communications in the forms of letters, postcards, newsletters, calendars, 0  phone calls, and e-mails in order to get notification out to parents. 2. East Bronx Academy for the Future will take the following actions to involve parents in the process of school review and improvements under section 116 of ESSA: In the 2013-2014 school year we will conduct a review with parents present, at least three different learning walks to have parents involved with the process of qualitative assessment of instruction in our school. The school will also help with the facilitation and the distribution of the learning environment surveys. This will allow the school to have parents give qualitative assessment of instruction, safety, and culture of the school. 3. East Bronx Academy for The Future will provide the following necessary coordination, Parental Involvement and School Quality technical assistance, and other support in planning and implementing effective parental involvement activities to improve student academic achievement and school performance: Parents will be notified through a monthly calendar, newsletter, letters, flyers, e- mails, and phone calls as to the date and time of meetings and workshops to address the implementation of any programs that school has to offer. 4. East Bronx Academy for the Future will coordinate and integrate Title 1 parental involvement strategies with parental involvement strategies: Monthly parent workshops will be provided for all parents to develop knowledge of instructional program, assessments for city and state standards, Chancellor’s Promotional Policy, and student Code of Conduct. There will also be provided with workshops that target specific parents such as, ELL and IEP workshops. 5. East Bronx Academy for the Future will take the following actions to conduct, with the involvement of parents, an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of the parental involvement policy in improving school quality. The evaluation will include 1  identifying barriers to greater participation by parents in parental involvement activities (with particular attention to parents who are economically disadvantaged, are disabled, have limited English proficiency, have limited literary, or are of any racial or ethic minority background). The school will use the revise, if necessary (and with the involvement of parents) its parental involvement policies. Parental Involvement will occur through attendance at Annual Fall Back – to – School night to present and discuss curriculum expectations. There will be a 6th and 9th grade orientation in the summer to prepare incoming parents and students on the expectations and responsibilities of the families. The school will also provide training programs for parent volunteers for the classroom and lunchroom. The parents association will facilitate fundraising events to support student achievement. We will also provide pilot programs for parents as reading partners. The school is equipped with wheel chair associability and elevator assess. 6. East Bronx Academy for the Future will build the schools’ and parent’s capacity for Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement strong parental involvement, in order to ensure effective involvement of parents and to support a partnership with the parents, and the community to improve student academic achievement, through the following activities specifically described below: a. The school will provide assistance to parents of children served by the school, as appropriate, in understanding topics such as the following, by undertaking the actions described in this paragraph – i. the State’s academic content standards ii. the State’s student academic achievement standards iii. the State and local academic assessments including alternate assessments, the b. The school will provide materials and training to help parents work with their requirements of Part A, how to monitor their child’s progress, and how to 2  work with educators: workshops, conferences, classes, both in-State and out- of-State, including any equipment or other materials that may be necessary to ensure success. children to improve their children’s academic achievement, such as literacy training, and using technology, as appropriate, to foster parental involvement, by: Parents will receive progress reports through their children, through the mail and by using Skedula on a daily or monthly bases. This will give them a clear view of where their children are before they receive their report cards. Training workshops will be provided to help parents access their child’s information on line, through grade book wizard, from their homes, or businesses. Parents will share responsibilities for student performance through Parent/Teacher Conferences, School Leadership Meetings, and Family Support and Intervention Conferences. Discretionary School Parental Involvement Policy Components The school Parental Involvement Policy may include additional paragraphs listing and describing other discretionary activities that the schools, in consultation with its parents, choose to undertake to build parents’ capacity for involvement in the school and school system to support their children’s academic achievement, such as the following discretionary activities listed under section 118(e) of the  Involving parents in the development of training for teachers, principals, and other educators to improve the effectiveness of that training;  Providing necessary literacy training for parents from Title 1, Part A funds, if the school district has exhausted all other reasonably available sources of funding for that training;  Providing necessary literacy training for parents from Title 3, funds, to those parents of English Language Learners, if the school has exhausted all other reasonably available sources of funding for that training.  Paying reasonable and necessary expenses associated with parental involvement activities, including transportation and child care costs, to enable parents to participate in school related 3  meetings and training sessions;  Training parents to enhance the involvement of other parents;  In order to maximize parental involvement and participation in their children’s education, arranging school meetings at a variety of times, or conducting in-home conferences between teachers or other educators, who work directly with participating children, with parents who are unable to attend those conferences at school;  Provide translation at meetings and to any materials that are distributed to parents;  Adopting and implementing model approaches to improving parental involvement;  Developing relationships with community based organizations in the community that will provide resources for parental involvement. This includes but is not limited to faith-based organizations;  Provide other reasonable support for parental involvement activities under section 1118 as parents may request. The Parent Compact is designed for EBA and families to work cooperatively to provide for the successful education of children agree to: School-Parent Compact (SPC) THE SCHOOL AGREES THE PARENT/GUARDIAN AGREES To convene an annual meeting for Title I parents to inform them of the Title I program and their right to be involved. To offer a flexible number of meetings at various times, if necessary, and funds if available, to provide transportation, childcare or home visits for those parents who cannot attend a regular school meeting. To actively involve parents in planning, reviewing and improving the Title I programs and the parental involvement policy. To provide parents with timely information about all programs (at least 10 4  days in advance). To provide performance progress reports for each child and other pertinent individual and school district education information. To provide high quality curriculum and instruction. To deal with communication issues between teachers and parents through:  Parent-teacher conferences at least twice annually  Monthly reports to parents on their children’s progress  Reasonable access to staff  Opportunities to volunteer and participate in their child’s class  Observation of classroom activities To assure that parents may participate in professional development activities if the school determines that it is appropriate, i.e. literacy classes, workshops on reading strategies. To become involved in developing, implementing, evaluating, and revising the school-parent involvement policy. To participate in or request technical assistance training that the local education authority or school offers on child rearing practices, teaching, and learning strategies. To work with his/his child/children on schoolwork; ensure that they read for 25 to 30 minutes per day. To monitor his/her child/Children’s:  Attendance at school  Check grade book wizard at least once a week to make sure all assignments are current; and to communicate with their teachers  Homework  Documents sent home through back pack and through the mail. 5  To share the responsibility for improved student achievement. To communicate with his/her child/children’s teachers about their educational needs. To ask parents and parent groups to provide information to the school on the type of training or assistance they would like and/or need to help them be more effective in assisting their child/children in the educational process. To have at least one other parent phone number to have a support, connection, and to encourage to attend workshops, meeting, and Parent Teachers Conferences. _____________________________________ Lead Teacher work with subject teams to review and select curriculum. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships The school will partner with Phipps Neighborhoods as a Community School to train Parent Ambassadors. I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff Parents are always welcome as key members of our community. We make every attempt to accommodate them whenever they arrive, but, if a teacher is teaching or of another staff member is performing other duties (observations, professional development, etc) we will sometimes ask them to make an appointment. We support parents via Parent Abassador programmming, Adult Education services, Food Pantry and other needs. I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities In partnership with the school and according to their means, parents are responsible for making sure students attend school and are prepared to learn (fed, clean, clothed, rested, healthy). Parents are responsible for attending/participating in/communicating with school staff and in voicing their opinions and helping to make decisions about and for the school. III. Student Responsibilities Students are the only reason our school exists and, as such, they are the primary people involved in doing work and helping to make decisions. They have a responsibility to make sure they are in school, prepared to learn and ready to engage in work and decision making. 6  Addendum: Community School Partnerships Directions: The Community School (CS) strategy is directly aligned to the Framework for Great Schools. Community Schools bring schools and community partners together and integrate academics, health, youth development, and family engagement to provide students with the tools and opportunities they need to succeed. The Core Services in Community Schools are Expanded Learning Time (ELT), Attendance Supports, Family Engagement, and Health & Wellness. Part 1 – Community School Partnerships Goal(s) How is the CS strategy integrated into academic instruction at your school, and what impact has it had on student academic outcomes? ELT workshops for HS students. Workshop participation and internships offerings (paid and unpaid) will promote daily attendance due to the requirements being closely aligned with our school's attendnace goals. College workshops will focus on post secondary options while incresing students awareness surrounding college admission, GPA requirements and financial aide. Career workshops and internships will support career exploration with workshops focusing on resume prep, mock interviews job search and vocational traning. Sudents Advocates will monitor students attendance and perform outreach to ensure that students are in school daily in order for them to receive adequate instructional time. Four Student Advocates will be hired by the Lead CBO in order to support 100 students who were deemed chronically and severely absent (90%-85%) during 2016-2017 school year. Advocates will provide daily check-ins and weekly 1 on 1 meetings. They will be provided with data via the New Visons portal (heat map) and student sorter that will in serve as a support when creating attendance interventions. Advocates will also complete personalized Individual Achievement Plans (IAP), which is an in depth attendance and academic plan where acdemic and attendance goals are strategically aligned with one another. In partnership with Mercy College, staffulty and couutesy of our peer voulnteers prep sessions are being offered in order to prepare students in grades 6-12 for statewide standardized testing. Parents who attend Community School events and or become parent leaders will be afforded the opportunities to work alongside other parents who might share the same commonalities regarding their childs academics. Family engagement events will equip parents with the tools to assist their child during every step of their academic journey. School wide events that are geared towards the overall success of the family and not just the success of the student which creates a welcoming and inclusive environment for all. Family engagement events will afford families the opportunity to weigh in on school wide concerns, but more importantly have an active part in finding solutions. Decreasing school suspensions by 15% by adopting a restrative justice school model will improve the climate of the school by providing students with social emotional tools that will assist them in their efforts to work through their challenges alongside their peers. Students who receive support around Social Emotional Learning (SEL) are equipped with tecniques and preventive measures that combat repetitive behaviors. Such occurances often take place inside of the classroom and results in student removals or interruption of instructional time. Once the social emotional needs of a student are met they are able to work towards academic success. Indicate the summative goal(s) of the Community School for the 2018-19 school year. Be sure to construct the goal to be SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Realistic, and Time-bound. CBO Budget - Lead CBO Student Adovocates will create and implement attendance inventions for students in grades 6-12. Interventions are data driven and personalized to meet the needs of each student. Students who were chronically absent and severely chroncially absent (90%-85%) will be makeup the caseload. Tiered Interventions will be carried out in order to ensure that we reach our goal of an 3% increase in attendance for 90% of the students who are assigned to the caseload. A decrease in absences will result in students missing fewer instructional school days than the previous year which will assisst in our efforts of reaching our school wide attendance goal of 85% Core Service Area: Family Engagement Supports Revenue Source: School Budget in Galaxy- Attendance home Visits will be conducted by school staff which will support our efforts to increase attendance. Daily RDAL calls will be made in order to inform parents of the students absence in a timley fashion. Core Service Area: ELT- Revenue Source: Community School CBO budget,Mercy College- In school tutoring services in partnership with Mercy College work study participants, will provide Math and ELA tutoring services to 15% of our High School population. Students who scored between( 69-74) on the ELA regents and (64-69) on the math regents. Services will help increase their chances of scoring a 75 or higher on ELA and and 70 and higher on Math which will deem them college ready. 20% of our High School students will participate in college and career exploration workshops, peer to peer mentoring and or 7  internship opportunities Core Service Area: ELT- Middle School CBO (SASF 21st Century grant) successfully implement programming that builds students 21st century skills. The program will service 90 students in grades 6th-8th Core Service Area: Health and Wellness: Community School CBO Budget MH Allocation In partnership with Astor mental health, school based clinitian will have an active caseload of 30 students. Middle School & High School social emotional groups led by Astor Clinician Core Service Area: Family Engagement- Revenue Source: Commnity School Budget- Monthly parent workshops, parent trips, SLT meetings and CST meetings. Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Community School Annual Goal(s): How will achieving your Community School Goal(s)--in Expanded Learning Time (ELT), Attendance Supports, Family Engagement, and Health & Wellness--support your academic goals for students? SLT and CST meetings where they will take part in discussing agenda items that pertain to not only the school community, but the community as a whole. Attendees are given the oppoortunity to pass motions and are given the platform to address school wide concerns. Our family engagement teams are open to welcoming all parents who are looking to become community school leaders and are interested in working closely with other parents in order to share and discover new resoyrces that will benefits students and families alike. Our Community School will enlist the help of our parent leaders when planning the community school forum and rely on parent leaders to provide outreach for the event. Parents will have the opportunity to review and discuss the success and challenges of the school and actively take part in structuring the upcoming school year. We will also host bi-weekly family engagemnet meetings where parents will have the opportunity to lead the meetings in order to edcuate parents on the importance of family engagement and how it relates to student success. The lead CBO will be attendance to provide support and resources that will assist the team with their goals for the acdemic school year. Part 2 – Community School Partnerships Core Services Action Plan Part 2a. Identify the Community-based Organization (CBO) partnerships that you will develop in ELT, Attendance Supports, Family Engagement, and Health & Wellness, their target student population(s), and scope of the services provided. As well as supporting schools’ supportive environment and attendance work, CBOs should be helping to support your school’s instructional focus. CBO Partnership Phipps Neighborhoods Sports & Arts Foundation Astor Center for Children & Families Mercy College Part 3 – Budget and Resource Alignment Target Population Studnets with attendance issues Middle school Students w/Mental Health needs College Readiness Scope of Service SY18-19 SMART Goal Lead partner Increase graduation rate to 82% Sports and arts programming Increase middle school attendance to 90% Mental Health Services Increase enrolment to 40 College Increase college readiness to 50% Part 3a. Indicate resources your Community Partnership will leverage to achieve your summative SMART goal(s) and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 8 Funds Part 3b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) Title I SWP Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside X 21st Century SIG Grant School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 3c. Describe how the school will partner with the Lead CBO to do the following: 1. Community Schools are expected to partner with a community-based partner organization (CBO) and together with members of the School Leadership Team, hire a Community School Director. The Director will lead implementation of the asset and needs assessment process, and other critically important coordinating activities. Indicate how you will leverage this aspect of the work. Community Schools are expected to personalize the needs of all students, through strategic programming and services, as determined by the asset and needs assessment, and must also offer Expanded Learning Time (ELT) and mental health programming. In completing this section, ensure that you think about how: (1) the right services are provided to the right students and families at the right time; and (2) how you will seamlessly coordinate services with instructional programming happening throughout and outside of the school day. Indicate how you will implement this work, and describe other programming you anticipate to be in place to strengthen this initiative. Community Schools are expected to emerge as Partnership Schools, which are places where parents and families feel welcome, actively participate in the conversation and decision-making around the renewal of their schools, and have many opportunities to advocate for their children. Monthly meetings and Community School Forums engaging families and community stakeholders will be a critical part of this family engagement strategy. Describe how you will implement this aspect of the work. Community School Principals are expected to meet on a weekly basis with their Community School Director, select Assistant Principals, key staff, and other CBOs, to analyze trends in data and case manage individual students. Data tools – including the New Visions Data Sorter - and training will be available for schools to use. Indicate how you will implement this aspect of the work. 2. 3. 4. 1. We are partnered with Phiips Neighborhoods. 2. We have partnered with Astor to provide Mental Health Programming and with Achieve Now Academy for ELT Supports. 3. We are a Partnership School and everyone is welcome here! We have monthly meetings as described above. 4. The principal and Community School Director meet on a weekly basis and talk many times daily to coordinate the work of the community school especially with regard to attendance and students' mental health needs. Part 4 – Community School Partnerships Oversight 9  Part 4a. Key Staff and Partners 1. Name and describe the scope of involvement of all community partners working in the school (include partners supporting ELT, counseling, enrichment, etc.) 2. Name the members of your Community School Team and how meetings will be organized and structured to engage all stakeholders and be focused on results. 3. Explain data strategies including the use of the data sorter, and steps that the school will take to ensure that the appropriate interventions are provided to the right students CBO, Deans, Assistant Principal, Parent Coordinator and Attendance Coordinator Attendance Meetings: take place once a week :DOE Attendance Teacher, Principal, Parent Coordinator, Lead CBO, Attendnace Coordinator, Parent Ambassadors, New Visions Rep and Guidance Partner Meeting: Once a week: CSD and Principal Grade Team Meeting: takes place bi weekly: 6-12 Grade Team Leaders, Lead CBO, Attendance Coordinator, Principal, Student Advocates, Deans and Student Advocates. Part 4b. Indicate resources needed including human resources, instructional resources, and schedule adjustments to implement the Community School program. We adjusted our PROSE schedule to meet students and families needs to stay open until 9 p.m. three days a week and have teacher meetings in the mornings. We've added Success Mentors and other staff to meet families needs. Part 4c. Timeline for implementation and completion, including start and end dates. July 2017 - June 2018 Part 4d. Mental Health Work Plan Separate from this S/CEP, schools will complete a Mental Health Work Plan that will become an addendum to this document. 0  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 1  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: English Language Learners from grades 6-12 will have the opportunity to acquire writing, reading, listening and speaking skills in order to improve their academic performance in the humanities and sciences as well as their state exams and Regents. The Title 3 program will consist of a two part program separated by grade level, (middle school and High School) In our MS grades we have around 67 ELLs throughout grades 6-8 and 48 ELLs in grades 9-12. In MS the focus will compromise of literacy development through an emphasis on reading and language acquisition. The 34 participating ELLS in this activity will be comprised of level according to the 2018 NYSESLAT and/or NYSITELL scores .Instruction will be provided for students and will be split by grade level with three teachers (Wendy Valdez , Jonathan Baez, and Tania Spencer) in the classroom. The MS students will be participating in these sessions during after-school hours from 2:30-4:30pm Tuesday - Friday since After School PD take place on Monday. All services will be provided in English as well as utilizing translations into other languages when needed for newcomer ELLs. All MS ENL students are invited to attend the After School program from the hours of 2:30 - 4:30 pm. The program will be running from October 2018 to May 2019 for approximately 30 sessions. During instruction students will be seated at round tables with support from one of the three teachers. Some of the materials that will be utilized will be reading and writing textbooks and workbooks, computers, iPads, chart paper, markers, projector, dictionaries and access to library books. In addition, students will practice their academic skills using academic interventions such as text-based discussions, independent reading , and literacy in Math Problems. Based on the level of success achieved by the students and increase in NYSESLAT scores, this program is designed to help these students achieve further success. The program structure will consist of targeted interventions with the two ENL teachers alongside collaborative planning with content area bilingual Special Ed teacher. . Intensive language development and enrichment activities through Cloze reading practices and activities supported with iBooks on iPads will be provided for students. Students will develop their reading levels by increasing their academic vocabulary and reading fluency skills by practicing reading and writing skills. High interest at level reading will be the primary tool, which will increase in level as the students show language development. In addition, students will engage in structured content-based reading (i.e. math, science, history, etc.) discussion circles based on their individual book selection from the iBooks application library, and classroom library. Students will acquire content specific reading skills and vocabulary in order to explore essential understandings in science, math and social studies. Text selections will range from entering to commanding in order to meet students’ language levels. At East Bronx Academy will offer a Saturday Academy for our 48 HS ELLs in grades 9-12. The instructional focus will be Regents instruction in Global History and ELA content. Our highest population of ELLs are in their Sophomore year of High School are comprised of approximately 19 ELLs that will be taking the Global History and ELA Regents for the first time. Evidence-2  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information based writing projects will run parallel to at-level reading activities in preparation for the English Regents Examination. Part of our focus will be on acceleration of students’ content knowledge. This program will run on Saturday from 10am -1 pm for a total of 15 sessions. Seven of these sessions will take in the winter before January Regents administration and eight will take place in the Spring before June Regents administration. The service providers are comprised of certified teachers; one ELA; one Global; and one ENL teacher. The ENL will team teach with each of the content teacher for 1 hour to provide the language level support. Teacher may use Regents Prep material, use of bilingual dictionaries/glossaries, and Barron's Regents text. Materials for both program activities will be charged to title 3 funding, and be complemented by other funding source. Attendance as well as student assessment portfolio will be kept on file. Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: At no cost to title 3, we have sent many teachers for professional development training at QTEL . Our goal for this year is for these trained teachers (Jonathan Baez , J.Erick Odom, Natalie Rynczak), along with our Learning Specialists and other staff members who are already trained in QTEL to turnkey the strategies and interventions they learned to other teachers during Subject Area team meetings which meet on Mondays for an hour. We will also take this time to train other teachers using this professional development as we have many first year teachers who can use the information gained through QTEL and the Teacher's College Reading and Writing project to address the learning needs of the ELL students in their classrooms. Teachers will receive Professional Development provided by the DELLS to reach and help navigate the learning styles of the ELLs at East Bronx Academy. We have been working closely with Teacher College Reading and Writing Project for the past four years. This year we will be sending our additional ENL teachers (Wendy Valdez, Tania Spencer) to Professional Developments at New Visions in order to assist them in growing as teachers that are learning how to scaffold the learning demands of students, how to create lesson plans that create active engagement amongst students, and providing how and where to locate reading material that can meet reading targeted for English Language Learners. Topics Include but are not limited to: - Scaffolding Academic Writing for Multilingual Learners - Academic Vocabulary & Language and Content-Integrated Instruction for Multilingual Learners - Embracing Digital Literacy and Classroom Technology - Standalone ENL Course Design, Curriculum, and Instruction All records such as attendance, agenda will be kept on file. These PD activities will be at no cost to Title 3, they will take place during mandated PD time. 3  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: Parents of ELLs have expressed interest in learning more about a variety of topics that would help them to better understand their children’s schooling. We will provide monthly workshops, held on the first Wednesday of the month that take place during the hours of 6:00-7:30 pm, at the school about the variety of topics that would be of interest to ELL parents. These sessions will present information on a variety of topics including citizenship, the rights of ELL parents and students, use of New Visions student trackers and Skedula Program, and academic interventions parents of ELLs can provide at home. This will be in conjunction with Parent Association meetings. We will also focus on teaching parents about the technology resources they have available to them through the school in order to communicate with teachers as well as check in on their children’s academic progress. Other topics will be determined by a survey of what parents would like to see covered at these workshops. These meetings are presented bilingually in which each parent of the meeting is translated to accommodate the parents. We will provide translation for parents at these meetings. We will continue to offer our Adult ENL program to take place for two hours every Saturday. These classes will teach Level 1 English and a beginner-intermediate component for those parents who have been taking this class with our school over the years. This class is designed for those parents who have had little or no exposure to English, including new arrivals or adults who have lived in the United States for many years but never formally studied English. Each unit of study branches from self to school, family, home, jobs, and community; thus giving ELL parents the vocabulary, grammar, and the expressions needed to communicate with the school community about situations and themselves. This year, the Office of Safety and Youth Development has also provided funds for mentoring during our Saturday Academy, via the Mentoring for Real program. All attendance, agenda and fliers will be kept on file. Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits) NA 4 Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. n/a  Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title.  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL n/a n/a NA n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a NA NA 5  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 12 School Name East Bronx Academy for the Future Borough Bronx School Number 271 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Sarah Scrogin Coach type here ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Brendaly Torres Teacher/Subject Area type here Teacher/Subject Area type here Related-Service Provider type here Superintendent type here Assistant Principal Steven Brady, Nicholas Laweren Coach type here School Counselor Yolanda Nieves Parent type here Parent Coordinator Marilyn Johnson Field Support Center Staff Member type here Other (Name and Title) type here C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 0 2 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 678 6 Total number of ELLs 86 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 12.68%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 0 1 2 3 4 0 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? The assessment tools we use are F&P, NYSITELL, MOSL, ENIL, Spanish Lab, Monthly Performance/ Writing Tasks, Mock Regents, TCRWP Consultant, QTEL and MOSLs. Through F&P assessment teachers are able to asses students which in turn gives the teacher valuable data on students' reading comprehension, decoding, phonological awareness and levels of fluency. The NYSITELL gives insight as to the student's level of English acquisition, MOSL determines the amount of growth each student has made in both reading and writing. The analysis of these various quantitative data helps to inform the school's instructional plan and provides a guide as to what interventions and next steps need to be taken to ensure student success. The constant monitoring of the data aids in creating and revamping the targeted instructional intervention plans. From this data, we have created intervention classes where students are learning to decode using REWARDS and Reading Recipe. Students are placed in this class according to a Slossan exam score and attend a daily reading intervention class. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? 7  Structures that have been put in place are Weekly Team meetings where teachers come together and work on data analysis, class structures, and curriculum alignment. We also have students scheduled for Advisory, where students are asked to reflect on past MP, work towards creating and achieving success with goals, and discuss school culture. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? At different points in the school year, teachers analyze ELL periodic and formative assessments to monitor the progress students are making and the efficacy of the programs that are put in place and the students' language developments. The teachers also look at writing performance tasks to determine if the strategies implemented are helping students progress to the next level. Teachers also use TCWRP reading and writing progressions to see where students are and to see where they need to go next. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? Weekly teacher meetings, and School Wide Pds. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] Question does not apply 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. In looking at the data, students who scored an entering level on the NYSITELL in the lower grades showed a steady progress in phonological awareness and language acquisition. However, according to the NYSESLAT, most of the students who received Expanding remained on the same level or digressed to a transitioning level. The data suggests that students continue to have difficulty with making meaning of texts and using literary strategies for literary analysis and evaluation. Further assistance with language exposure and idiomatic language continues to still be troublesome for many students. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? We have ELL realted PDS, Data analysis and reviews for the entire staff, the EDAT tool, and the NV Sorter tool. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. East Bronx Academy currently provides ELL services the ELLs across grades 6-12. The ENL teachers service these students using a Free Standing ENL model in which students are scheduled for an ENL period. This is in addition to receiving their ELA classes where one of the ENL teachers also pushes into. Students are blocked together and travel together as whole in grades 6-8. In grades 9-12, the students travel as a whole for some classes and are placed in other classes based on academic need. If the non-traveling students are placed in other classes they are at least 3-5 ELLs in the classes to help support one another. Students are also placed heterogenously. b. TBE program. If applicable. N/A c. DL program. If applicable. N/A 8  2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? Students are scheduled for an ENL class in addition to their ELA class. This class is delivered by ENL Specialist, Brendaly Torres or ENL teacher Jonathan Baez. In addition, we print the RLAT and use the EDAT to ensure proper mandated minutes are being met. Brendaly Torres is also a member of the programming committee which each student is looked at individually to ensure they are placed in correct classes to ensure that the student is meeting the mandated minutes according to CR Part 154.2. When looking at the EDAT, we use it to target individual student needs by subject area (i.e. they have attempted the science regents but have not passed…) that will then mean that these students need to be scheduled into the same integrated science class. This information is then entered into STARS. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. The ENL teachers, Brendaly Torres and Jonathan Baez, uses implementations of the SIOP, QTEL and TCRWP to ensure that all content is delivered and comprehensible to all ELLs in English. These instructional frameworks assist the teacher in planning with a language focus but also ensuring that the content is accessible to all learners in the classroom in order to meet CCLS. Language and Content Objectives are made explicit so that students are aware of their learning. To monitor language acquisition, teachers use a variety of formative assessments in the literacy and content used in the classroom and across the curriculum. Materials and resources that are available are technology such as iPads, and computers, bilingual dictionaries, translation, grouping, visuals, and specific strategies. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? We ensure that Spanish Speaking ELLs are appropriately assessed through the Spanish- LAB. Home language is given through translated material and bilingual glossaries. In addition, we look at the ENIL, spanish running record, to ensure that students are making progress in the Home Language. Home Language Regents exams are also provided if available. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status A. SIFE students are identified at the beginning of the year by the ENL teacher. Once these students are identified, the ENL teacher meets with each grade team to talk about strategies to work with SIFE students. These students are provided additional academic instructional support after school by the ENL teacher, a Special Education teacher, and by peer tutors who are former ELL students. Online programs are also provided at level reading and writing activities that students complete 1-2 times a week. As the student progresses, the programs adjust to the students’ reading and writing levels and provides appropriate materials. B. In addition to ENL instruction during the school day, our newcomer ELLs receive additional support after and before school from the ENL teacher as well as peer tutors. Students also work with language buddies or teacher on learning activities focused on building fluency, early grade literacy, and language acquisition. Students work with technology to receive additional content specific support. They use online programs that are used to improve their writing practices and feedback is given to them in English and in Spanish. Reading passages are provided in English and in Spanish and a read aloud option is also available. Many of our newcomer ELLs also come before school for additional language development from the ENL teacher. Content area teachers meet with the ENL teacher once a week during common planning time to discuss ELLs and come up with strategies to use in the classroom to support their learning. 9  C. These ELL students receive two English classes one is ELA and the other is an ENL class. They also attend after school where they receive academic interventions and addition support from the ENL teacher, Special Education teacher and peer tutors. Students work with technology programs to receive additional content specific support . They also receive reinforcement of the lessons that were taught throughout the school day. They also work on building academic language needed for their classes throughout the day. Content area teachers meet with the ENL teacher once a week during common planning time to discuss ELLs and come up with strategies to use in the classroom to support their learning. D. These ELL students receive two English classes one is ELA and the other is an ENL class. They also attend after school where they receive academic interventions and addition support from the ENL teacher, Special Education teacher and peer tutors. Students work with technology programs to receive additional content specific support . They also receive reinforcement of the lessons that were taught throughout the school day. They also work on building academic language needed for their classes throughout the day. Content area teachers meet with the ENL teacher once a week during common planning time to discuss ELLs and come up with strategies to use in the classroom to support their learning. In addition to above mentioned programs, ELLs in 6-8 are invited to attend the SASF program which provides additional reading, writing and Math support for MS ELLS. ELLs in 9-12. are invited to attend the PHIPPS program which provides additional reading, writing and Math support for HS ELLS. E. Former ELLs are provided with ENL instruction for 90 mins per week through the content area. This is in addition to having the choice to attend After school and/ or Saturday Academy. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? The ENL teacher provides academic interventions both inside and outside the classroom based on the students’ IEPS and recommendations given by the Special education teacher. The teacher provides support with addition the the Special education teacher of using and creating UDL lesson plans, teaching techniques, SIOP, QTEL, TCRWP, AVID and small guided conferring lessons. Like other ELLs, they attend after school where they receive academic interventions and additional support from the ENL teacher, Special Education teacher, and peer tutors. Content area teachers meet with the ENL teacher and Special Education teacher once a week during common planning time to discuss ELLs and come up with strategies to use in the classroom to support their learning. The ENL teacher also collaborates with the Special Education teacher to ensure they are working towards the goals on the student’s IEP. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? The schools uses the curriculum instruction, and flexibility in scheduling to achieve their IEP goals and attain English Language proficiency. Through small group instruction, integrated co-teaching and ENL teachers provide the students with the least restricted environment. Students may also be placed in AIS class which is built into the schedule if needed by the student. Kid talks also take place to ensure that the students are making progress and assess the schedule and strategies being used. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. Extended day program: • Our extended day program meets after school during 8th period. Currently, all ELLs take part in 60 minutes of additional support per day working with teachers or participating in peer tutoring. We would like to expand the program by 60 percent so that all LTE students can take part in 100 minutes per day of extra support either before or after school. • Math and Writing Skills: Based on a needs assessment of our 2016 NYSESLAT results and other data sources, our extended day program will focus on both writing and mathematics literacy. In the additional time scheduled, ELLs will focus on improving their writing skills, mathematics proficiency, and math fact fluency by working with online programs. • Peer Tutoring: We would also like to expand our after-school peer tutoring program, in which former ELLs tutor current ELLs, to include extra support in all subjects. Teachers of this program will take part in Professional Development to develop ELL teaching strategies. 0  During the school day: • We utilize a free standing ENL class in addition to an ELA class in grades 6-12 to provide ELL services during the school day. The ENL teacher and the content area classes meet with the general education teacher for an hour a week. We would like to add to these services by providing LTE students with small group instruction focusing on math, writing, and reading interventions. • ELL students will be instructed by an ENL teacher for an hour in small group instruction and conferring techniques. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? We are looking to add an additional, 3rd, ENL teacher for the fall. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? At this time, we do not have any programs that will be discontinued. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. SASF and the PHIPPS (after school programs) have bilingual teachers. In this fashion, ELL’s are encouraged to attend the program designated for their grade level. These programs offer an array of sport teams that students can participate in In addition, ELL students receive modified schedules whenever possible and necessary where they can attend after school tutoring with the ENL teacher as well as sports teams and/or other social clubs with in the school 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. In all classrooms, we have digital projectors, document cameras, iPads and laptops that are accessible to students at all times. Digital Projectors and Document Cameras are used on daily basis to project lesson plans. iPads and laptops are used for certain units being delivered by the teacher but are open to be used by all students at any moment during the class period. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Students have the ability to read books in their native language as well as the ability to write in their native language. Spanish Lab provides information on the level of literacy in the home language. This also helps us understand the types of resources to provide to students. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. According to the work that we do we make sure that it is always grade level and age appropriate. To assist with this matter, we use Fontas and Pinell and ENIL (Spanish Running Record) to asses students reading level and make reading books available to them according to what they are able to read. The school ensures that all required services and resources support and correspond to ELLs ages and grade levels. We also use their IEP to ensure that they are receiving materials on their individual level based on assessments and as indicated in IEP. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? We are the only school in the building. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). Our school offers many after school activities in which we encourage the students to attend. Some activities that we have are track,soccer, baseball, basketball, student government, cooking club, photography and a few others. For our new ELLs we encourage them to join at least one activity so that they can learn more about America and social culture. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? Spanish is offered as an elective. 1  18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? N/A Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? Teacher Talk & Kid Talk: Our ENL and Learning Specialists will meet with subject area teachers 112 minutes a week during common planning. At these meetings, teachers pose questions about their teaching practice and discuss students who are struggling in their classes or need extra support. The ENL teacher and Learning Specialists share specific interventions and ELL strategies teachers can use in their classes to support their work and their students. Our staff meets an hour a week for Professional Development in grade-level team, subject area teams, or as a whole school. The ENL and Learning Specialists will provide Professional Development during this time at least once a month by presenting strategies and interventions that will support our ELL, including our LTE, population. The weekly Adult Learning time will also be a place for teachers to turnkey “best practices” learned at QTEL and for the Inquiry Team to present information to the whole staff. We are committed to implementing the principals of QTEL in all classrooms by having at least 2 teachers per content area (8 total) trained in QTEL every summer. These trained teachers, along with our Learning Specialists and other staff members who area already trained in QTEL, will turnkey the strategies and interventions they learn to other teachers during Adult Learning, Inquiry Team meetings, subject area team meetings, Teacher Talk, and Kid Talk. During the 2014 – 2015 school year we sent a total of 3 teachers to receive training in Quality Teachers of English Language Learners (QTEL). Our goal for this year is send other teachers to also receive training. Through this training we have seen ELLs make tremendous gains in and outside the classroom. We also would like to extend this offer to other teachers using this professional development as we have many first year teachers who can use the information gained through QTEL and the Teacher's College Reading and Writing project to address the learning needs of the ELL students in their classrooms. Teachers will receive Professional Development provided by the OELL to reach and help navigate the learning styles of the ELLs at East Bronx Academy. We have been working closely with Teacher College Reading and Writing Project for the past three years, and, this year, our TCRWP Consultant, Carla Espana, is a former ELL herself and pursuing a PhD in Teaching of English Language Learners. Carla Espana comes to East Bronx Academy to provide PD to teachers fifteen times a year for fifty-six minute sessions. During these sessions with Ms. Espana, teachers are learning how to scaffold the learning demands of students, how to create lesson plans that create active engagement amongst students, and providing how and where to locate reading material that can meet reading targeted for English Language Learners. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. 2  We provide professional development on ELLs provided by the ENL teacher and Administrative Team at our August and September Adult Learning sessions prior to the start of the new school year. The ENL Coordinator will work with the Math and ELA departments to provide quality professional development to ELL core content teachers. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? Parents of ELL students have expressed interest in learning more about a variety of topics that would help them to better understand their children’s schooling. We will provide monthly workshops at the school about the variety of topics that would be of interest to ELL parents. These sessions will present information on a variety of topics including citizenship, the rights of ELL parents and students, parent resources on ARIS, use of New Visions student trackers, and academic interventions ELL parents can provide at home. We will also focus on teaching parents about the technology resources that are available to them through the school in order to communicate with teachers as well as check in on their children’s academic progress. Other topics will be determined by a survey of what parents would like to see covered at these works 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Adult ESL classes are offered to all ELL parents. We also have ELL parent workshops. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Paste response here: 3 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Sarah Scrogin, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 4  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: East Bronx Academy School DBN: 12X271 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Sarah Scrogin Title Principal Steven Brady Assistant Principal Marilyn Johnson Parent Coordinator Brendaly Torres ENL/Bilingual Teacher Parent Teacher/Subject Area Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach School Counselor Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 5  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 12x271 School Name: East Bronx Academy for the Future Superintendent: The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Brendaly Torres ENL Specialist Yes Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. When a new student to the New York City Department of Education Public Schools comes to our school, Ms. Torres, a full-time certified ENL teacher administers the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS) and conducts an informal oral interview in English and in Spanish as well if applicable. If the family’s native language is a language other than a language one of our pedagogues speaks, Ms. Torres will call the Interpreation Services in order to have someone over the phone speak and administer the HLIS in the student’s native language in the presence of Ms. Torres. If the HLIS indicates that the student is potentially an English Language Learner, the ENL teacher will administer the NYSITELL (and LAB-R Spanish, if applicable) within 10 days if a language other than English is spoken, as identified in the HLIS. Before the NYSESLAT administration window opens, the ENL teacher runs the ITEL report from ATS to identify the students eligible to take the NYSESLAT exam. The ENL teacher then proceeds to meet with the ELLs in the school to discuss the format of the exam and explain how they will be assessed. Students will then receive schedules for each modality of the NYSESLAT. The ENL teacher administers the speaking portion one-on-one in a separate location, while the rest of the modalities are administered by the ENL teacher throughout the testing window in a separate location. Twice a year, in the Fall and in the Spring, the 6  parent coordinator and ENL teacher have a workshop to explain the three program choices for ELL students. Workshops are conducted in the parents’ native language, and the content of the workshops is based on the EPIC toolkit. The workshop displays the program choices in oral, written and visual formats. Parents are shown the informational DVD in the EPIC toolkit. Parents are notified through phone calls, letters mailed home, and in some cases home visits are conducted to ensure all parents attend this workshop. We also hold a workshop when our school receives new students throughout the year, within one month of when the student enters. If a parent misses the workshops, we call them in for an individual meeting or one-on-one phone call. The parent coordinator sends out a mailing to all ELL parents that includes the Parent Survey and Program Selection forms and explains that the forms need to be returned to the school. We make sure the forms are returned within two weeks or by the time the parent workshop (as described above) takes place at the beginning of the year by reminding the students, e-mailing parents and by placing phone calls. Parents who attend the program choice workshop at the beginning of the school year are reminded at this time to turn in their forms if they have not done so already. If we still do not receive the forms, we will conduct a home visit. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral English Spanish Wolof French Arabic 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. N/A Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. 7  Document Name Month/Frequency How do you Distributed to plan to Families translate? Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. Newsletters & Calendars (monthly) Parent-Teacher Conference Annoucnements After-School Program New York State Testing Information Letters from Teacher Teams/Curriculum Information 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school Parent Association - 1 st Wednesday of Each Month at 6 p.m. plan to provide interpretation service(s)? Parent Teacher Conferences Attendance Teacher Calls Guidance Calls Teacher Parent-Outreach Calls 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. 8  Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) We have met all of the above requirements and posted our Welcome Posters, Parents Bill of Rights, have copies of guides for Language Access accessible and keep ID guide in SSA desk and Main Office. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? We will use the parent survey to gather parent feedback. 9 
