 09X294 School Name: THE WALTON AVENUE SCHOOL Principal: DANIEL RUSSO 2018-19 CEP-CS 1  Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC)   Section 1: School Information Page School Information School Name: Daniel Russo 320900010294 School Number (DBN): 09X294 BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Phone Number: K-5 1425 Walton Avenue, Bronx NY 10452 718-293-5970 718-293-5976 Fax: Nicole Perkins NPerkin2@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Geographical District: 09 Superintendent’s Office Address: Email Address: Daniel Russo Vilma Lawson Joseph Cruz VilmaLawson Marina Martinez Leyla Ulloa JazminMartinez Jason Estevez District Information Leticia Rodriguez-Rosario Superintendent: 1245 Washington Ave. Suite 102 LRosario2@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718-579-7143 Phone Number: 718-681-6247 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC)   FSC: Bronx Executive Director’s Office Address: Jose Ruiz Executive Director: 1FordhamPlaza, Bronx, NY 10458 jruiz2Aschools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 718 828-7776 Phone Number: Fax:   Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Daniel Russo VilmaLawson Joseph Cruz Harriet Tice Grisel Cardona VianeySierra Herrera Tommy Bruce Jason Estevez Delis DeLeon Theresa Pavone Shannon Nilan *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/ UFT Member/ UFT Member/ UFT   July Alcantara GriselCardona KeishaGriffin Sonya Rios Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/   Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with   the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement   Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Section 4: CEP Overview PS 294 is a school entering its sixth year at the X64 campus in the Mount Eden neighborhood of the Bronx. Serving 500 students kindergarten-fifth grade we are a multicultural, multilingual community of students, teachers, parents, and support personnel working to create a generation of young people who are critical thinkers, clear communicators, and collaborative team mates. Each child receives a tailored educational experience that values their unique contributions to the learning community and supports them to become life-long learners. Teachers and   parents are committed to every student’s individual achievement and work tirelessly to provide the support necessary for all children to excel. The Walton Avenue School makes daily decisions rooted in our five core values: Respect for all people, Enthusiasm for Learning, Empathy for those in need, Collaboration with our peers, and Perseverance through challenging tasks. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. During the 2017-2018 school year PS 294 excelled in the element of “Rigorous Instruction ” through the implementation of a departmentalized schedule for grades 3-5. The Five Practices for Orchestrating Productive Mathematics Discussions and Thinking Maps offered our students multiple opportunities across every lesson to make their thinking visible. Teachers were broken into content teams and developed through intensive coaching from Instructional Leads in ELA and Math. "Collaborative Teachers" met with coaches multiple times per week to conduct student inquiry, review data trends, and receive feedback on lesson plans and student work artifacts. If leaders place Thinking Maps at the core of the yearlong PD plan, and every teacher offers students more opportunities to make their thinking visible, then teachers will be able to use this assessment data to refine instruction which will improve achievement for all students across all content areas. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. PS 294 serves 30% students in temporary housing. Using centralized support through the Bridging the Gap Initiative and a privately secured $100,000/year grant from Duetsche Bank, we are able to provide students and families with wrap-around services such as mental health support when they are experiencing the trauma of housing instability. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. On the 2018 ELA Exam, 69% of students scored a Level 3 or Level 4, 82% of the former ELL population, and 50% of the students with disabilities population. The overall increase from 2016 to 2017 was 8%. On the 2018 Math Exam, 94% of all students scored a Level 3 or Level 4, including 83% of the ELL population, 96% of the former ELL population, and 73% of the students with disabilities population. The overall increase from 2017 to 2018 was 16%. During the 2018-2019 school year, the instructional focus at PS 294 is “Making Thinking Visible” – every teaching providing opportunities for student to illustrate their thinking during every single lesson. We believe the following: If leaders place Thinking Maps at the core of the yearlong PD plan, and every teacher offers students more opportunities to make their thinking visible, then teachers will be able to use this assessment data to refine instruction which will improve achievement for all students across all content areas. 0  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 09X294 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 0K,01,02,03,04,05 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 515 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual YES Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 40 39 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 10 11 26 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 96.0% % Attendance Rate 95.0% % Reduced Lunch 20.2% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 1.0% 78.3% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 1.4% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 5.25 0% 18% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 69.2% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 77% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A NO N/A NO NO Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A NO N/A NO NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A YES N/A N/A YES High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Yes N/A 67 67 92.9% 0.8% 22.1% 17.9% 1.0% 1.6% 2 9% 4.7 94.2% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No NO N/A N/A NO NO NO N/A N/A NO NO N/A N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 1  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. During the 2017-2018 school year, Math proficiency on NYS Exams (Grades 3-5) increased 16% while the ELA proficiency on NYS Math Exams (Grades 3-5) increased by 8%. In Math, the school adopted The Five Practices for Orchestrating Productive Mathematics Discussions, a pedagogical framework the emphasizes student-led discussion and productive struggle. In ELA, teachers engaged in six months of professional learning around Socratic seminar. Overall, this lead to an increase in the number of teacher observation reports reflecting an "Effective" rating in Danielson 3C: Student Engagement from 55% to 65%. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, all teachers will receive an "Effective" rating in Danielson 3C: Student Engagement on 75% of their observations as measured by the Danielson Framework for Teacher Evaluation. 2  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Align units of study with rich, authentic texts that lend themselves to student discussion, the ELA team will enrich units of study with new mentor texts where necessary. All Learners including ELLs, SWDs, and At-Risk) November-June SLT Instructional Coaches Principal Assistant Principal Classroom Teachers Ensure full implementation of The Five Practices for Math Discussions, a strategic 10-week Roll-Out will support teachers through unpacking the model one piece at a time. All Learners including ELLs, SWDs, and At-Risk September-November Math Coach Principal Expand opportunities for student discussion in ELA, teachers will engage in 10 days of self-direction peer inter-visitations around engagement strategies for student discussion. November -May All Learners including ELLs, SWDs, and At-Risk Assistant Principal Gr 3-5 Math Lab Sites ELA Coach Principal Assistant Principal ELA Lab Sites Classroom Teachers Teachers will receive 10 days of on-site professional development from C King Education around engaging math tasks, as well as 10 days of curriculum writing from C King Education to explicitly embed opportunities for engaging math tasks into the curriculum units. All Learners including ELLs, SWDs, and At-Risk November -June Principal UFT Chapter Leader Math Coach Assistant Principal Math Consultant 3  3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. By June 2019, the Parent Coordinator will hold a total of eight parent instructional rounds focused on discussion-based learning, such as showcasing The Five Practices for Math, Socratic Seminar in ELA, and The Five Practices for Task-Based Discussions in Science. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Per Diem Coverage, money is used to fund per diem days in order for teachers to attend professional development and to plan for implementation of the tasks, to analyze the student data using school-wide rubrics, and to use their analyses to inform future planning. Title I and SIG funds will be used for third party professional development to be held on-site and tailored the the specific needs of our school. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring X SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By November 2018, 20% of teacher observations reports will reflect an "Effective" Rating in Danielson 3c: Student Engagement. By February 2019, 35% of teacher observations reports will reflect an "Effective" Rating in Danielson 3c: Student Engagement. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) Coaching Walk-Through logs and Advance Teacher Observation Reports Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 4  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? During the 2017-2018 school year, PS 294 logged twenty-one Level 3, nine Level 4, and one Level 5 OORS Reports. We worked to get 50% of all teachers TCIS trained and certified, inclusive of all special education teachers. A total of 74 Reports were logged, with 49 occurring pre-TCIS training, and 25 occurring post-TCIS training. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 75% of classroom teachers, inclusive of all special education teachers, will receive comprehensive training in social-emotional learning via four-day institutes at either Therapeutic Crisis Intervention for Schools (TCIS) or Responsive Classroom, measured by the collection of course certifications. 5  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Two Teachers will attend a joint District 9/OSYD/FSC sponsored training cohort I in the month of October Two Teachers will attend a joint District 9/OSYD/FSC sponsored training cohort II in the month of October Four Teachers and One Para will attend on-site TCIS training sponsored by Abbott House in the months of October-November Two Teachers will attend a joint Distict 9/OSYD/FSC sponsored training cohort III in the month of December Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Second Grade General Education and Special Education Students (201 & 122) Third Grade General and Special Education students and Fourth Grade Special Education Students (301 & 231) General Education and Special Education Students Grades K-3 (120, 101, 103, 202, 302) Special Education October FSC Safety Lead Principal Assistant Principal October FSC Safety Lead Principal Assistant Principal October-November FSC Safety Lead Principal Assistant Principal December FSC Safety Lead Principal Assistant Principal 6 Four Teachers and One para will attend on-site TCIS training sponsored by Abbott House in the month of January Students Grade 3 & 4 (301, 402) General Education and Special Education Students Grades 2-5 (302, 202, 502, 401) January Abbott House Principal Assistant Principal 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Parents will receive an overview of TCIS Training co-sponsored by the New Settlement Parent Action Committee in November. A cycle of TCIS Training for SLT Parents will be held in March 2019. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Title I Parent funds will be used to supplement the parent TCIS Training Title I and SIG Funds will be used to contract the services of Abbott House to run on-site trainings. Title I and Tax Levy funds will be used to pay for per diem subs to cover the classes of teachers attending PD during the school day. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA C4E 21st Century Grant X SIG Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 7  By November 2018, 15% of untrained teachers, inclusive of all special education teachers, will be certified in Therapeutic Crisis Intervention for Schools (TCIS), for a total of 65% school-wide. By February 2019, 20% of classroom teachers, inclusive of all special education teachers, will be certified in Therapeutic Crisis Intervention for Schools (TCIS), for a total of 70% school-wide. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Certificates of Completion will be submitted to the principal at the end of each training cycle. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 8  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. During the 2017-2018 school year, an exploratory committee conducted research around the process of, benefits from, and compatibility between our school and the International Baccalaureate Programme. The IB Programme was identified as the unifying factor of school-wide curriculum framework needed, as referenced in our 2017-2018 Quality Review. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, PS 294 teacher teams will reflect on and revise six trans-disciplinary units to align to the framework of the International Baccalaureate. 9  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Work together with consultant to create a single exemplar unit of study . ELA Content Team June Principal Meet weekly with cluster teachers to identify alignment and areas of gap between current units of study and IB Trans-disciplinary themes. Cluster Teachers ELA Coach ELA Content Teachers Sept-June Principal UFT Chapter Leader Cluster Teachers Revise a single unit of study as a team and receive feedback from the principal. IB Committee March Principal UFT Chapter Leader ELA Content Teachers Cluster Teachers Identify areas of revision needed in all six units IB Committee Sept-June Principal Execute and document one revised, IB-aligned unit of study across all grade and content areas and reflect on the process at June PD day. ELA Coach ELA Content Teachers Cluster Teachers UFT Chapter Leader All Teachers May-June Principal ELA Coach Math Coach Cluster Teachers 0  3b – Parent and Family Engagement IB Committee How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. By June 2019, the Parent Coordinator will hold a total of eight parent instructional rounds aligned to the Essential Elements of Learning for the International Baccalaureate. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Supplies and materials for curriculum design will be funded using Title I and Tax Levy funds. Instructional resources will be funded using Title I and Tax Levy funds. Schedule adjustments and program coverage will be funded using Title I and Fair Student Funding. Supervision per session will be funded using Tax Levy. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By November 2018, a total of 1 unit will be revised to align to the IB Framework, with zero executed and documented. By February 2019, a total of 3 units will be revised to align to the IB Framework, with one executed and documented. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Review of Curriculum Units. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 1  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. A review of IEPs during the 2017-2018 school year revealed that a lack of alignment between students' annual goals and information presented in the Present Level of Performance. During the first two IEP reviews of the 2018-2019 school year, two randomly selected IEPs were found to present goals that were standards-based, but the Present Levels of Performance section did not provide clear information as to why these goals were selected for the respective students. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 80% of finalized IEPs will contain a Present Levels of Performance page that has specific supporting evidence about a student's disability and how it impact his/her participation and progress with the general education curriculum along with goals that specify how the learner will make progress with the general education curriculum, as evidenced during SIT IEP Reviews of 10 randomly selected IEPs. 2  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Before each IEP meeting, there will be a pre-conference held with all service providers to review draft of IEP and ensure that all goals and the PLOP are relevant to one another. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All special education teachers, paras, and service providers Oct-June IEP Teacher Special Education Liaison Assistant Principal Principal Professional development will be provided for special education teachers in order to give ongoing support and examples of quality IEPs. Topics for such PDs included, but are not limited to, data-informed goal setting and progress-monitoring, FBA/BIP alignment, deconstructing the components of the PLOP, and writing in objective voice. All special education teachers, paras, and service providers School Psychologist Oct-June IEP Teacher Special Education Liaison Assistant Principal Principal Administrative review of all IEPs before finalization. X X 3b – Parent and Family Engagement School Psychologist Oct-June IEP Teacher Assistant Principal Principal All special education teachers, paras, and service providers X X X X X X How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. 3  Parents of students with annual and re-evaluations will be offered workshops and individual consultation from school social worker on skills and strategies to reinforce IEP goals. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Teacher Per Session Print Materials Teacher Per Diem Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. We will monitor progress by complete three additional IEP reviews (2 IEPs at each review) in January, March, and June. We will also review four additional finalized IEPs in order to monitor progress in ten total IEPs. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. FSC IEP Review Tool Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 4  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. During the 2017-2018 school year, PS 294 expanded family empowerment opportunities through incorporating academic-based workshops into social events, which resulted in an increase of 20% of parents receiving workshops/information on the academic curriculum and pedagogical approaches used to instruct students at our school. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, at least 50 parents will achieve Tier III status through regular attendance at "Link to Learning" activities as identified by the Ladder of Engagement. 5  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Monthly Coffee Hour for parents in which they engage in a hands-on dive into school data, including but not limited to the unpacking of state assessment results, parent survey results, attendance monitoring, and logged Level 3 and Level 4 OORS Reports All families Monthly Special Services workshops for parents in which they are oriented to the extra layers of support offered to sub group populations including, but not limited to, students with disabilities, English Language Learners, former English Language Learners, students receiving related services, Students in Temporary Housing, over-age and under-credited students, and at-risk students (RTI) All families Monthly Community Resource workshops for parents in which they are oriented to community resources and opportunities for themselves and their children including, but not limited to, the Floating Hospital, Smile NY, G.E.D courses, mental health supports, mentoring opportunities for teens, etc. All families Monthly Instructional Rounds for parents in which they receive a presentation around the delivery of one content area of instruction and then visit classrooms in teams of parents, lead by teachers, with the opportunity to debrief implications for support at home. All families The first Friday of every month Principal Parent Coordinator Sept-June Instructional Coaches The second Friday of every month Assistant Principal Parent Coordinator SBST Coaches Sept-June Assistant Principal The third Friday of every month Sept-June The fourth Friday of every month Sept-June Service Providers CBO Staff Parent Coordinator Guidance Counselor CBO Staff Bridging the Gap Social Worker Principal Assistant Principal Instructional Coaches Cluster Teachers Classroom Teachers 6  3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. Parents will be informed of "Family Friday Events" and our school goal to move at least 50 parents to Tier III as per the Ladder of Engagement at September Coffee Hours. Family Friday events are advertised on the school's Facebook page, the monthly parent calendar, and via school messenger. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Overtime hours for parent coordinator will be funded through Tax Levy. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By November 2018, 20 parents will have achieved Tier III status. By February 2019, 30 parents will have achieved Tier III status. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Sign-in Sheets from Link to Learning Events. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 7  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) 1. Small Group 1. During class time F/P Benchmark Assessments 1. Reading Strategy Group Instruction 2. Small Group 2. During class time 3. Small Group 3. During class time ELA Simulation Exam NYSELSAT Scores Native Language Arts Performance Assessment 2. Leveled Literacy Intervention 3. Leveled Guided Reading Mathematics NYC Performance Assessment – Math 1. Tier I Remediation embedded into Small Group 1. During class time 1. Small Group 1. During class time Math Curriculum 1. Repeated Readings of NF Texts 2. Interactive Writing 2. Whole class and Small Group 2. During class time 3. During class time 3. Leveled NF (Science) Guided Reading 1. Repeated Readings of NF Texts 3. Small Group 1. Small group 1. During class time 2. Interactive Writing 2. Whole class and Small group 2. During class time 3. During class time 3. Small Group Science Social Studies Math Simulation Exam Non-Fiction Performance Assessments Social Studies Performance Assessments ELA Non-Fiction Performance Assessments 8 At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Teacher Referrals Parent Referrals OORS Incident Reports At Risk Counseling 3. Leveled NF (Social Studies) Guided Reading 1. Counseling 2. Leveled Literacy Reading Intervention for Hold over students 1. One-to-one and Small Group 2. Small Group 1. During school day 2. During school day 3. During school day 3. One-to-One 3. Push-in support for At-Risk students prior to referral for Spec Ed Services 4. Counseling in the Schools and Abbott House 9  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) The number of students in temporary housing is 148. 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. Counseling in Schools will provide counseling services to students in temporary housing through individual and/or group sessions. Counseling in Schools team is composed of a social worker and a dance/art therapist, who will also expand services to the parents of students in temporary housing through monthly check in's. In addition, these counselors will also provide classroom support to students and teachers as needed. Our Bridging that Gap Social Workers assists STH families with all of their needs on an indivdualized basis including but not limited to securing transportation for families in shelters, support with the PATH office, and close monitoring of student attendance through daily reports and contact with family workers at shelter sites. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). n/a 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 0  n/a 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. n/a 1  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. All provided Professional Development will be aligned to city-wide expectations and targeted areas such as : Guided Reading, Leveled Literacy Intervention, Small Group Strategy Instruction, After-School ELA Academy, Teacher Teams modify DOE Core Curriculum ,Reading intervention for lowest third on first grade, Additional reading support for sub-group in Kindergarten, Teacher coaching on ELA best practices, Academic. The School leader will continue to work closely with the BFSC HR personnel Director to find highly qualified candidates for vacant positions. The school will participate in District Nine Instructional Rounds Professional Development to ensure that all teacher teams are engaged in reflective conversations around best practices and increasing their repertoire of instructional strategies. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). PSx294’s professional development sessions will include the modifying of the DOE Core Curriculum during teacher team meetings that are led by an outside writing consultant. Teachers will design six week units that are monitored through two performance tasks, one fiction and one non-fiction. Tasks are assessed using rubrics that reflect the performance indicators of the CCLS. Math curriculum reflects the DOE core curriculum option, but is enhanced by work done during study groups, in which we raise the rigor of the problems of the day, incorporate more centers, and design writing prompts so students are reflecting on their learning daily and writing across content areas. Science and Social studies curriculum is designed by using a combination of the NYS Scope and Sequence, as well as the newly adopted Social Studies CCLS Intervention for ELLs, Teacher coaching and modeling of Bilingual Lesson, Additional reading support for holdover students, Daily Phonics Instruction, Inquiry teams analyzing student assessments (ELA and Math Performance Tasks), Common planning twice a week for each grade and twice a month for bilingual team, The implementation of a balanced literacy model within each classroom, the hiring of instructional paraprofessionals to be split between every two classrooms, the opening of a writing lab for students as a cluster subject twice a week. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources 2  Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). PS 294 does not have Pre-K Classes in our school, but the Parent Coordinator works with nearby pre-k providers to distribute information about our school’s Kindergarten program. Incoming Kindergarteners (those that attended Pre-K and those that did not) attend an orientation for parents and students, and phase-in to the school day with two half-days. One teacher on staff was formerly a district administrator of a Pre-K program, and she advises the principal on matters of early childhood education and the transition from Pre-K to full-day Kindergarten at our school. Parent outreach for incoming Kindergarteners begins in February of 2017 to invite interested parents into our school to view instruction, to meet with school staff. Accepted Kindergarten families get a home visit from the Abbott House staff to build relationships with the family. 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. PS 294 holds MOSL (Measures of Student Learning) meetings three times annually to discuss which assessments will be used throughout the year to track student progress and eventually be the data metrics to calculate teacher effectiveness. The MOSL Committee is a shared decision-making committee that includes representatives from every grade, cluster representatives, and an ESL representative. The MOSL Committee makes a recommendation to the principal, who takes teachers’ recommendation into account when making a final decision for the school. ELA and Math content teams have weekly team meetings, which is used once per month for inquiry using the Tuning Protocol. Each teachers leaves the inquiry meetings with next steps identified by their peers and content leads of instructional strategies to be implemented during the next cylce and revisited during the next student inquiry meeting. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools 3  Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Column B Section Reference(s) See the Budget Alignment and Resources in Sections 5A Part 4, Section 5B Part 4, Section 5C Part 4, and Section 5E Part 4 See the Budget Alignment and Resources in Sections 5A Part 4, Section 5B Part 4, Section 5C Part 4, and Section 5E Part 4 See the Budget Alignment and Resources in Sections 5A Part 4, Section 5B Part 4, Section 5C Part 4, and Section 5E Part 4 Title I Part A (Basic) Federal Title II, Part A Federal Title III, Part A Federal Title III, Immigrant Federal 478,575 0 14,542 0 Tax Levy (FSF) Local 3,714,834 X X X 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools 4  may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. 5   IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.  Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 6  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent Involvement Policy (PIP) Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in our school. Therefore, 09X294, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between our school and the families. Our school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Learning Leaders as trained volunteers and welcomed members of our school community. Parents are welcome during Open School Week and Meet the Teacher. PS 294 Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. PS 294 community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of our school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students Our school will support parents and families of Title I students by: 7  ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math and use of technology; ● Ensuring that all letters distributed by the school are translated into both English and Spanish ● Host Coffee Friday with the principal once a month to share input about the school ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of our school community; Parental Involvement and School Quality In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent-Teacher Association, as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, our school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents and the Parent-Teacher Association in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to schools to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in our Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association Parent-Teacher Association. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend our school and will work to ensure that our school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability grade-level curriculum and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and 8  technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home, using math in everyday life, healthy eating and nutrition, the Common Core Learning Standards, Special Education and IEPs, Reading at Home with children, using NYC ARIS, as well as assistance in filling out school forms. ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g. ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, Progress Report, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings, with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct a Saturday Parent Fair where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement PS 294 will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, or Parent-Teacher Association, Title I Parent Committee, and Learning Leaders ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● encouraging more parents to become trained Learning Leaders; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing each teacher with a parent communication log for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand; School-Parent Compact (SPC) Template School-Parent Compact (SPC) 9  09X294, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the No Child Left Behind (NCLB) Act; I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each trimester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; 0  ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; Provide general support to parents by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing parent workshops facilitated by school staff (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; Parent/Guardian Responsibilities: II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; 1  ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by promptly ● reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 2  Addendum: Community School Partnerships Directions: The Community School (CS) strategy is directly aligned to the Framework for Great Schools. Community Schools bring schools and community partners together and integrate academics, health, youth development, and family engagement to provide students with the tools and opportunities they need to succeed. The Core Services in Community Schools are Expanded Learning Time (ELT), Attendance Supports, Family Engagement, and Health & Wellness. Part 1 – Community School Partnerships Goal(s) How is the CS strategy integrated into academic instruction at your school, and what impact has it had on student academic outcomes? Abbott House collaborates with administration and support staff to ensure all students are reaching their full academic potential by providing mental health support, including TCIS training to teachers. They also conduct weekly attendance and SIT meetings. All of the above supports positively impact the school environment so that students can access learning in an orderly and consistent community and achieve to their highest potential. Indicate the summative goal(s) of the Community School for the 2018-19 school year. Be sure to construct the goal to be SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Realistic, and Time-bound. By June 2018 Abbott House will have supported the school in achieving a average daily attendance percentage of 95%. Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Community School Annual Goal(s): How will achieving your Community School Goal(s)--in Expanded Learning Time (ELT), Attendance Supports, Family Engagement, and Health & Wellness--support your academic goals for students? Abbott House provides mentor and incentive plans for attendance such as success mentoring to check student daily attendance and progress. Monthly Incentives for consistent attendance. In order to promote family engagement; parent workshops are provided and PEEPS (Parent Education Enpowerment partners program) a parent internship in the classroom during daily instruction. Part 2 – Community School Partnerships Core Services Action Plan Part 2a. Identify the Community-based Organization (CBO) partnerships that you will develop in ELT, Attendance Supports, Family Engagement, and Health & Wellness, their target student population(s), and scope of the services provided. As well as supporting schools’ supportive environment and attendance work, CBOs should be helping to support your school’s instructional focus. CBO Partnership Abbott House Abbott House Target Population 550 Scope of Service Mental Health 20 At-Risk Boys Boys Support Group Food Bank of the City of New York 60 STH Families Food Pantry New Settlement After 150 students After-School Program SY18-19 SMART Goal Improve the mental health environment of the school. 3  Part 3 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 3a. Indicate resources your Community Partnership will leverage to achieve your summative SMART goal(s) and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Abbott house staff consists of a Community School Director, Pyschiatrist, Clinician and Health Educator. Abbott house staff offers mental health evaiuations, counseling, small groups, coaching, trainings, workshops, and wekly attendance and SIT meetings. Part 3b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) Title I SWP Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century C4E School Achievement X Other Funding Part 3c. Describe how the school will partner with the Lead CBO to do the following: 1. Community Schools are expected to partner with a community-based partner organization (CBO) and together with members of the School Leadership Team, hire a Community School Director. The Director will lead implementation of the asset and needs assessment process, and other critically important coordinating activities. Indicate how you will leverage this aspect of the work. Community Schools are expected to personalize the needs of all students, through strategic programming and services, as determined by the asset and needs assessment, and must also offer Expanded Learning Time (ELT) and mental health programming. In completing this section, ensure that you think about how: (1) the right services are provided to the right students and families at the right time; and (2) how you will seamlessly coordinate services with instructional programming happening throughout and outside of the school day. Indicate how you will implement this work, and describe other programming you anticipate to be in place to strengthen this initiative. Community Schools are expected to emerge as Partnership Schools, which are places where parents and families feel welcome, actively participate in the conversation and decision-making around the renewal of their schools, and have many opportunities to advocate for their children. Monthly meetings and Community School Forums engaging families and community stakeholders will be a critical part of this family engagement strategy. Describe how you will implement this aspect of the work. Community School Principals are expected to meet on a weekly basis with their Community School Director, select Assistant Principals, key staff, and other CBOs, to analyze trends in data and case manage individual students. Data tools – including the New Visions Data Sorter - and training will be available for schools to use. Indicate how you will implement this aspect of the work. 2. 3. 4. CSD will coordinate activities based on the needs of students in the school setting and families in the community. Need for students and families will be identified based on referrals submitted, interactions with families and input provided by school staff. CSD will also use detailed information from the data sorter to identify assets and needs to implement necessary plans of action. Abbott House will communicate daily with administration, teachers, and support staff regarding the needs of students. Abbott House staff will meet with families to ensure all social and academic needs are being met through the mental health environment of the school. Abbott House will also offer family workshops, class room push-ins, and coordination of mental health supports to meet the needs of the students. Abbott House has sub contracted New Settlement to provide ELT. New Settlement offers academic support for students enrolled into the program. Abbott 4  House communicates and coordinates with New Settlement staff regarding students in need to ensure they are functioning in a positive manner. Through the mental health environment of the school, Abbott House has developed positive, and engaging relationships with school staff, students and their families. Abbott House participates in school activities, conferences, and programs to support students in need while encouraging parent participation. Along with parent workshops addressing societal and educational needs, Abbott House will also offer support for parents involved with the Parents Education Empowerment Partners Program (PEEPs). CSD will meet with administrators and other school staff on a weekly basis to share information regarding students receiving mental health supports and identify other students in need. CSD will share information with administrators and other school staff from the Data Sorter to ensure all involved identify trends and are addressing needs collaboratively. Part 4 – Community School Partnerships Oversight Part 4a. Key Staff and Partners 1. Name and describe the scope of involvement of all community partners working in the school (include partners supporting ELT, counseling, enrichment, etc.) 2. Name the members of your Community School Team and how meetings will be organized and structured to engage all stakeholders and be focused on results. 3. Explain data strategies including the use of the data sorter, and steps that the school will take to ensure that the appropriate interventions are provided to the right students Community School Director ensures CBO staff is supporting the school in the areas of need. CSD will input and update information in the data sorter regularly. Information updated consists of interventions, identified success mentors, and students receiving mental health supports. Psychiatrist conducts mental health evaluations and medication management. Clinician offers counseling for students and therapeutic interactions with staff. Community Health Educator provides families with identified resources, coordinates events and conducts psychosocial interviews with families. Abbott House staff also attends all meetings pertaining to students in need. Part 4b. Indicate resources needed including human resources, instructional resources, and schedule adjustments to implement the Community School program. In order to provide effective and efficient mental health supports, an increase in funds to hire qualified staff would be beneficial for school staff, students, and families. Part 4c. Timeline for implementation and completion, including start and end dates. Abbott House goals will be assessed monthly throughout the school year. From 9/2017 through 6/2018. Part 4d. Mental Health Work Plan Separate from this S/CEP, schools will complete a Mental Health Work Plan that will become an addendum to this document. 5  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 6  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: Rationale: The Walton Avenue School is a K-5 school located in the Mount Eden neighborhood of the Bronx working to create a generation of young people who are critical thinkers, clear communicators, and collaborative team-mates. Each student at The Walton Avenue School receives a tailored educational experience that values their unique contributions to the learning community and supports them to become life-long learners. Teachers and parents are committed to every student’s individual achievement and work tirelessly to provide the support necessary for all children to excel. The Walton Avenue School creates student teams that problem solve, ask questions of those around them, and work together to seek detailed explanations of the world in which we live. The Walton Avenue School (PS 294) has 100% of the students’ population qualifying and receiving free meals. This K through 5 school serves an ethnically diverse population of 80% Hispanic, 17% African American, 1.4% White, 1.2 % American Indian/Alaskan, 0.4% multi-racial. The Walton Avenue School (PS 294) has 100% of the students’ population qualifying and receiving free meals. This K through 5 school serves an ethnically diverse population of 80% Hispanic, 17% African American, 1.4% White, 1.2 % American Indian/Alaskan, 0.4% multi-racial. Of the total school population (513 students), 37.6% are English Language Learners (193 ELLs, including 2 years eligible-commanding ELLs). At P.S. 294 we treasure the diversity of our school population and are committed to providing every ELL student with the opportunity to excel academically, socially, and to become balanced bi-literate in English and in Spanish. Currently P.S 294 has a Freestanding English as a New Language Program that services 81 students ranging from grades K through 5 and a K-5 Bilingual Transitional Education Program that educates a total of 112 TBE students. The Transitional Bilingual program contains of one class per grade, starting with kindergarten and ending with grade five. This TBE program nourishes a kindergarten class comprised of 24 students, a first grade class consisting of 18 ELLs, a second grade class of 18, a third/fourth grade bridged-class containing 22, a fourth-fifth bridged class of 30 students. The total number of ELL per grade that comprises both, the ENL and TBE, programs is as follow: is as follow: There are 28 students in kindergarten, 29 in first grade, 33 in second grade, 26 in third, 24 in grade four and 53 in grade five. As the Home Language Survey and the Ethnic Census Report (RSSS) indicate in the community ethnicity break-down, the most common home language of our English Language Learners is Spanish (169 students or 87.6 percent of the ELLs population) with the exception of seven (7) students who speak Arabic; five (5) who speak Soninke; Two (2) who speak Bengali, Two (2) who speak French, Two (2) Fulani, one Haitian-Creole and five (5) who speak African-derived dialects. The Fall 2018 NYSITELL and the Spring 2017 NYSESLAT scores indicate that in regards to language proficiency levels, the breakdown of the total ELL population (193) is as follows: 43 students are Entering, 22 Emerging, 24 Transitioning, 27 Expanding and 83 Commanding. 7  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Subgroups and Grade Levels of Students to be Served Transitioning/Expanding Kindergarten After-School ELL Program PS 294 will offers an ELL After School Program for Transitioning kindergarteners. The main objective of this program will be to serve as a jump-star into reading by focusing on multi-sensory instruction in phonemic awareness, phonics and vocabulary development. Ample opportunities will be provided for social-interactive activities that incorporate the use of manipulative. In this program, English will be the language of instruction. This program will invite 13 students who fall into the mentioned category. Materials to be used for this program will include: Finish Line New York for ELLs 2019 Edition by Continental Press and Spotlight on English (a supplemental ENL phonetically-based and language development program published by Santillana). In addition, a leveled literacy intervention program by Fountas & Pinnell is also going to be used for students' exposure to repetitive sight words as well as sentence and expression patterns. The cost of Finish Line NY for ELLs 2019 Edition will come out of the Title III Immigration Supplemental Funds. However, the school will provide the Leveled Literacy Intervention Program. These materials are supplemental and distinct from materials used for daily instruction. This program will take place on Wednesdays and Thursdays for a hour and a half from 2:30 - 4:00 pm and will be ran from January 10, 2019 through May 17, 2019. Instruction will be provided by our fully certified 1-6 Elementary kindergarten bilingual teacher, Ricky Yagual. Entering-Emerging 3-5 After School ELL Program PS 294 will also an ELL After School Program that supports Entering-Emerging English Language Learners, as evidenced by their NYSESLAT/NYSITELL levels. The goal of this program is to increase English acquisition and language learning by engaging students in social-interactive activities designed to strengthen students’ speaking and listening abilities by employing a multi-sensory approach to teaching. Class instruction will incorporate the use of manipulative, visuals, models and plenty of TPR techniques. In addition, students will learn targeted sight words and content-based vocabulary embedded in the core curriculum that will help them accelerate reading fluency and comprehension. Language of instruction will be English. Fifteen students are being targeted for this program. This program will take place on Wednesdays and Thursdays for a hour and a half and will run from January 10, 2019 through May 17, 2019 from 2:30-4:00pm. The service provider for this program will be our school fully certified 1-6 Elementary TBE teacher, Vellanire Barran. Materials to be used for this program are: Spotlight on English, published by Santillana and a Leveled Literacy Intervention Kit by Fountas and Pinell. Materials cost for this Entering-Emerging ELL Program will not be paid using Title III money since our school already possesses those materials. The targeted language of Instruction for this program will be English. Transitioning-Expanding First/Second Graders After School Program Apart from the above programs offered, our school will also open an After-School Program for grade one and two ELLs at the transitioning or expanding Level. This program will focus on strengthening the academic content, academic language and literacy skills tested on the NYSESLAT. The main objective of the program will be to equip these students with the social studies, science and math content-based academic language and knowledge to move them to a commanding level on the Spring 2019 NYSESLAT. Emphasis will also be placed on developing the vocabulary and reading sophistication skills necessary to be successful on non-fiction sessions of the NYSESLAT. This objective will be accomplished by engaging students in activities and tasks that explore in depth the academic content knowledge and non-fiction 8  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information reading skills until mastering them. The language of instruction in this program will be English. Fifteen students will be invited to participate in the program. Materials to be used include: Finish Line New York for ELLs 2019 Edition, supplemented by Getting Ready for the NYSESLAT, 2019. Those materials are not being provided by the school, thus the cost will come out of Title III Funds Supplemental Program. This program will take place on Wednesdays and Thursdays for an hour and a half from 2:30-4:00pm and will be ran from January 10, 2019 through May 17, 2019. Instruction will be provided by our ENL fully certified 1-6 Elementary Bilingual and TESOL teacher, Miguelina Suriel. The targeted language of instruction for this program will be English. Third and Fourth Grade Transitioning/Expanding After School Program PS 294X has also designed an ELL After School Program that supports English Language Learners who scored at the Transitioning or Expanding level on the Spring 2017 NYSESLAT or Spring 2019 NYSITELL in the third or fourth grade. The goal of this program is to increase English language acquisition and language learning by engaging students in social-academic interactive activities designed to strengthen students' listening, reading and writing skills. In addition, students will learn targeted math, science and social studies content-based concepts and vocabulary, embedded in the NYSESLAT and ELA core curriculum that will help them accelerate non-fiction reading fluency and comprehension. Language of instruction will be English. Fifteen students are being targeted for this program. The program will take place on Wednesdays and Thursdays for a hour and half and will run from January 10, 2019 to May 17, 2019 from 2:30-4:00pm. The service provider for this program will be our school fully certified 1-6 Elementary TBE teacher and ESOL teacher, Linett Olmo. The materials to be used for this program are: Guided reading non-fiction academic content-books, non-fiction audio books and Finish Line New York for ELLs 2019. This last mentioned material will be the only resource that will be paid using Title III Immigration Funds Supplemental Program. Our school ELL Program already possesses the Guided reading and audio books. For each targeted group, there will be a total of 33 sessions that will be extended to the duration of the program. Additional funding will be used from Title I to supplement proposed Title III services that will equal the amount that is above the allocated fund. All records, including student attendance and program notification sent in parents' preferred languages will be kept in room 301B to be available for review. Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: Rationale The overall schedule was strategically created to permit professional developments for all personnel who work with ELLs. The ELL Coordinator and the ENL teachers conduct professional developments during Common Planning time for teachers and paraprofessionals to train them on developing lessons and applying best practice strategies to serve English Language Learners enrolled in our ELL Programs. In addition, the schoolwide schedule has a built-in time for ELL personnel to meet once a week for 45 minutes to receive professional development from outside professionals or from School Professional Development Teams. An assigned ELL team 9  Part C: Professional Development representative attends grade meetings to share ELL best practices with mainstream teachers. An ELL team representative also meets with other school personnel such as Psychologists, Speech Therapist, Guidance Counselors and the School Leadership Team, as needed, to make sure ELL related issues and practices are being met. Furthermore, the ELL Team offers ELL-related trainings to the entire school pedagogy personnel during our general-school weekly staff meeting. The professional development our teachers receive support them in delivering Common Core-aligned instruction. For instance, our ELL teachers receive professional development on topics as: Developing higher order thinking and questions (teachers and students); Implementing meaningful/collaborative discussions in the classroom; How to develop performance tasks aligned to Common Core State Standards; How to analyze NYSESLAT/NYSITELL, Math, F&P and HLA Running Record Assessments for Instructional Implication. Specific PD was provided on how to implement the DOE-endorsed CCLS aligned math curriculum: Envision 2.0. The instructional coaches (Isidro Sanchez, Shannon Nilan, Nicole Perkins, Assistance Principal and Daniel Russo, School Principal) model lessons, co-plan, and co-teach with teachers struggling to implement the curriculum. Some of these professional development sessions are also offered during Election Day PD, Faculty Conferences Days and during Lunch and Learn sessions. Agendas, attendance logs, minutes, and copies of literature and materials used are kept on file in room 301 and at the main office. Bronx Field Support Center also provides training off-site throughout the year to which ELL teachers are registered to attend. In addition, teachers participate in student inquiry teams, where they look at student work in relation to specific skills of the CCLS and expected task rubrics in order to adjust instruction to reflect gaps in students' achievement. Our ELL Coordinator and selected school ENL teachers, Bilingual Teachers, School Pupil Secretary and Paraprofessionals are also registered to receive professional developments sponsored by the Office of English Language Learners at Central. Some of the topics our school targets for professional development are: State/City ELL mandates, Identification and Placement Process, Instructional Strategies and Interventions for Classroom Implementation, as scaffolding, vocabulary building and academic language development. Any of the components above will come at no cost to Title III. Professional Development Calendar September Date 1: September 17, 2018 Time: 2:20 - 3:20PM Topic: Unpacking the NYSESLAT: Instructional Implication Presenters: Isidro Sanchez, ELL Coordinator & Linnet Olmo, ENL Teacher Staff Members to receive training: Miguelina Suriel, Vellanire Barran, Mercedes Casado, Taisha Rodriguez , Ricky Yagual, Kelly Campoverde, Roxanna Vargas and Bilingual Pupil Service (BPS) Paraprofessionals. October Date 2: October 1, 2018 Time: 2:20 - 3:20PM Topic: Sharing Effective ENL Strategies Through UDL (Universal Design for Learning) Presenter: Miguelina Suriel, Certified TESOL & ENL Teacher Staff Members to receive training: Isidro Sanchez, Vellanire Barran, Linnet Olmo, Mercedes Casado, Taisha Rodriguez, Ricky Yagual, Kelly Campoverde, Roxanna Vargas and BPS Paraprofessionals. 0  Part C: Professional Development November Date 3: November 6, 2018 Time: 2:20 – 3:20PM Topic: Improving ELL Data Availability for Instructional Advantage Providers: Kay O'Connor, School Data Specialist and Isidro Sanchez, ELL Coordinator Staff Members to receive training: Vellanire Barran, Mercedes Casado, Taisha Rodriguez, Linnet Olmo, Ricky Yagual, Kelly Campoverde, Roxanna Vargas, Miguelina Suriel and BPS Paraprofessionals. December Date 4: December 10, 2018 Time: 2:20 – 3:20PM Topic: Using the DOK to Guide Your Lesson Questioning Provider: Nicole Perkins, Assistance Principal Teachers to receive training: Miguelina Suriel, Vellanire Barran, Mercedes Casado, Linnet Olmo Taisha Rodriguez, Kelly Campoverde, Isidro Sanchez, Roxanna Vargas, BPS Paraprofessionals and Ricky Yagual. December Date 5: December 17, 2018 Time: 2:20 – 3:20PM Topic: Creating Short Term Objectives and Long Term Goals for Differentiated Groups Provider: Lisa Alves, Literacy Coach and Isidro Sanchez, ELL Coordinator Teachers to receive training: Miguelina Suriel, Mercedes Casado, Kelly Campoverde, Taisha Rodriguez, BPS Paraprofessionals, Roxanna Vargas, Linnet Olmo and Ricky Yagual. January Date 6: January 7, 2019 Time: 2:20 – 3:20PM Topic: Interpreting and Complying with LAP & LTI Plans Provider: Isidro Sanchez, ELL Coordinator-Leads Discussion: ELL Team Share Reflections Teachers to receive training: Miguelina Suriel, Vellanire Barran, Mercedes Casado, Linnet Olmo, Taisha Rodriguez, BPS Paraprofessionals, Roxanna Vargas, Kelly Campoverde and Ricky Yagual. January Date 7: January 14, 2019 Time: 2:20 – 3:20PM Topic: Using Available Technology to Supplement Classroom Instruction Providers: ELL Team Share-out Session Teachers to receive training: Miguelina Suriel, Vellanire Barran, Mercedes Casado, Kelly Campoverde, Taisha Rodriguez, Isidro Sanchez, Linnet Olmo, Roxanna Vargas, BPS Paraprofessionals and Ricky Yagual. February 2019 Date 8: February 4, 2019 Time: 2:20 – 3:20PM Topic: Planning Meaningful Academic Content-Based ENL Instruction for ELLs Providers: Miguelina Suriel, ENL Teacher and Kelly Campoverde, Four Grade TBE Teacher 1  Part C: Professional Development Teachers to receive training: Vellanire Barran, Mercedes Casado, Linnet Olmo, Taisha Rodriguez, Isidro Sanchez, Roxanna Vargas, BPS Paraprofessionals and Ricky Yagual. February 2019 Date 9: February 11, 2019 Time: 2:20 – 3:20PM Topic: What and How to Teach HLA to Re-enforce ENL/ELA? Providers: Vellanire Barran, Third Grade TBE Teacher and Isidro Sanchez, ELL Coordinator Teachers to receive training: Miguelina Suriel, Kelly Campoverde, Mercedes Casado, Taisha Rodriguez, BPS Paraprofessionals, Linnet Olmo, Roxanna Vargas and Ricky Yagual. March 2019 Date 10: March 11, 2019 Time: 2:20 – 3:20pm Topic: Discovering the Benefits of Close Reading with ELLs Provider: Shannon Nilan, Literacy Coach Teachers to receive training: Miguelina Suriel, Vellanire Barran, Mercedes Casado, Kelly Campoverde, Taisha Rodriguez, BPS Paraprofessional, Isidro Sanchez, Roxanna Vargas, Linnet Olmo and Ricky Yagual. March 2019 Date 11: March 25, 2019 Time: 2:20 – 3:20PM Topic: Identifying the Instructional and Artifact Elements Needed in a TBE and a ENL Classroom Providers: A Team Collaborative Creation of Charts-Principal, Daniel Russo leads discussion Teachers to receive training: Miguelina Suriel, Vellanire Barran, Linnet Olmo, Mercedes Casado, Kelly Campoverde, Isidro Sanchez, Taisha Rodriguez, Roxanna Vargas, BPS Paraprofessionals and Ricky Yagual. April 2019 Date 12: April 8, 2019 Time: 2:20 – 3:20PM Topic: Strategies to teach Math to ELLs with Disabilities Provider: Nicole Lent, Math Coach Teachers to receive training: Miguelina Suriel, Vellanire Barran, Mercedes Casado, Kelly Campoverde, Taisha Rodriguez, Roxanna Vargas, BPS Paraprofessionals, Isidro Sanchez and Ricky Yagual. April 2019 Date 13: April 29, 2019 Time: 2:20 – 3:20PM Topic: Benefits of Using Thinking Maps for ELL Instruction Providers: Shannon Nilan, Literacy Coach and Taisha Rodriguez, TBE Teacher-Grade 1 Staff Members to Receive Training: Isidro Sanchez, Kelly Campoverde, Miguelina Suriel, Linnet Olmo, Vellanire Barran, Mercedes Casado, Roxanna Vargas, Ricky Yagual and BPS Paraprofessionals. May 2019 Date 14: May 6, 2019 Time: 2:20 – 3:20PM 2  Part C: Professional Development Topic: Is it Language, or Is it Cognitive: The LPT Process Presenters: Miguelina Suriel, ENL Teacher, Assisted by Mr. Sanchez Staff Members to Receive Training: Vellanire Barran, Kelly Campoverde, Ricky Yagual, Taisha Rodriguez, Linnet Olmo, BPS Paraprofessionals, Roxanna Vargas and Mercedes Casado. June 2019 Date 15: June 10, 2019 Time: 2:20 – 3:20PM Topic: Identifying Relevant Technology and Interactive Materials for a Summer Fun of Learning Providers: Taisha Rodriguez, TBE Grade One Teacher and Mr. Chin, Librarian Staff Members to Receive Training: Isidro Sanchez, Miguelina Suriel, Linnet Olmo, Kelly Campoverde, Mercedes Casado, Vellanire Barran, Roxanna Vargas and Ricky Yagual and BPS Paraprofessionals. The listed professional development sessions positively impact the progress of ELLs because what the team learns at those PDs is implemented and puts into practice in the ELL classrooms. The team also assesses the effectiveness of the implementation by sharing and having open conversations about how each of the learned experience is affecting students' learning. Adjustments are then made as need it. Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: Rationale * A high percentage of our school parent population speaks Spanish as their primary language. • Many parents are calling the school’s administrative offices requesting oral interpretation and translation assistance. • Many Mainstream Teachers and Special Education Teachers often rely on bilingual colleagues or friends for written translations and oral interpretation. • The demographic session of the CEP revealed that the number of ELL students being enrolled in our school has been increasing steadily. * At the Parent/Teacher Open House Conferences many parents expressed the need for receiving written communications translated in the Spanish Language * The school needs to broaden its parent outreach program and parent involvement • The number of Spanish speaking parents attending the school meetings has increased. * Spanish Speaking parents and speakers of languages other than English, need assistance on analyzing and interpreting school related data pertaining to the academic growth of their children. Program Description: Topics Covered PS 294 has in place an ongoing Wellness Initiative Program for ELL Families and their children that is intended to serve families who wish to learn how to cook different recipes and maintain a healthy family diet and/or weekly family menu. The goal of the program is to have at least 40% 3  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities of the school families participate in at least four wellness activities throughout the school year 2018-2019. Part of the initiative also includes involving families in learning and sharing culturally-relevant recipes with a focus on healthy options that incorporate fruits, vegetables, grains, proteins and lactose products. Some of the activities that the families are involved include: Wellness Committee Meetings, Parent Cooking Club, Family Cooking at Home (family share photos or evidence), Family Cooking Workshops (led by parents and staff members), Family Fitness Nights, Parent Community Health Ambassadors and Planting/Harvesting the School Garden. Some of the themes covered involve: Reading Food Labels, Selecting Fresh Products at the Market, Organic Vs. Non-organic Food, Planting and Harvesting the Garden, Campus On-Site Food Pantry, Healthy Bodegas Snacks, Home Snack Policy, Health Testing Snacks, becoming a healthy food advocate and developing family wealthy habits. The other component of the program will be devoted to creating Family Instructional Rounds, Family Arts & Crafts, Family Movie Night, Family Pot Lock, Family Cultural Concerts, Family Paint Night, Daddy-Child in School, Family Picture Day, Family Monster Night, etc. This programs take place every month from 8:15AM - 9:30AM and/or from 4:00PM - 5:50PM. The programs are ran from October 1, 2018 to June 17, 2019. The instructors for this adult-child program are going to be our fully certified Literacy Coach, Shannon Nilan and our school Public Health and Wellness Coordinator, Yuly Alcantara. Apart from the parent engagement activities described above, our school engages ELL parents in an ongoing monthly session entitled "Coffee Friday with the Principal." During these sessions, parents participate with their children in curriculum driven activities and concepts related to science, mathematics or literature. Parents are divided into groups according to their language of preference and a school teacher or coach who speaks the language of preference of the parents sits at their table to guide them through the activity in their language. These sessions are conducted the first Friday of every month throughout the entire school year beginning in September and ending in June of 2019. All the materials used for this family engagement programs are supplied and financed by New Settlement Apartments. Title III Supplemental Funds will not be used to pay per-session for this adult program. Parents are notified of the above activities via school letters, activity fliers, parents' bulletin boards and school voice messages in multiple languages that describe the activity being promoted, the time and day of the activity being offered and the place where it will take place. Those activities are also advertised in our monthly school calendar and at Parent Meetings/Workshops and Conferences; where parents have opportunities to register. Translation and interpretation are facilitated on each of those activities both in writing and orally in the languages that parents can understand. PS 294 has a multilingual staff that is available to translate based on parents' needs. A minimum of 10 sessions will be offered to Title III ELL Parents, as well as, families of non-ELLs for the remaining of the school year. 4 Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits)  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL 5  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 9 School Name Walton Avenue School Borough Bronx School Number 294 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Daniel Russo Coach ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Miguelina Suriel Teacher/Subject Area Teacher/Subject Area Kelly Campoverde TBE Related-Service Provider Superintendent Leticia Rosario Assistant Principal Nicole Perkins Coach Isidro Sanchez School Counselor Eric Aaron Parent Joseph Cruz Parent Coordinator Jose Cabassa Field Support Center Staff Member Cindy Campos Other (Name and Title) type here C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 1 2 1 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 1 1 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 4 0 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 505 6 Total number of ELLs 206 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 40.79%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): Spanish If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year 5 1 6 0 7 0 8 0 9 0 10 11 12 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 6 0 0 0 0 0 6 1 1 1 Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 2018-19 1 1 3 1 2 1 4 1 K 1 Lang. Sp Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 1 1 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? At PS 294 - The Walton Avenue School early literacy skills of English Language Learners are assessed throughout the year using a combination of formal and informal assessments. Formal literacy English and Spanish assessments are conducted using Fountas and Pinnell (grades K - 5), Benchmark Assessments and ELL English Periodic Assessment (grades 3 - 5). Similarly, Developmental Reading Assessment (DRA) is used to monitor home language progress of high literate ELLs who read at a level O or above, whereas, the Sistema de evaluación de la lectura is utilized to evaluate Spanish literacy skills of lower grade ELLs in grades K - 2 in the Transition Bilingual Program. Another NLA assessment includes the NYC DOE Native Language Arts Periodic Assessment. Our ELL team analyzes patterns encountered in these multiple assessments to make instructional adjustments, create goals, re-structure student groups or re-assign team members to fit the current needs of our ELL population. PS 294x population of English Language Learners is also assessed informally. Informal assessments are put into effect during guided reading instruction, through writing performance tasks, students’ portfolios, teacher-made assessments, teacher-7  student conferencing and group projects. Teachers' logs, writing postings and oral questionings are also a few examples of informal assessments in our classrooms. The data derived from formal and informal assessments provide valuable insights about our ELLs. Our June 2018 round of F&P assessments, for instance, has revealed that there exists a wide disproportion between learning of the two targeted languages. In general, our ELLs were acquiring English at a much accelerated rate than they were their home language (Spanish). This same F & P data also reveals that our kindergarten and second grade ELLs are generally making more progress in their reading levels than ELLs in grade one. Fourth graders showed similar progress, while third and fourth graders made adequate progress, but not to the extend of the fourth graders. Further, an initial analysis of writing performance tasks demonstrated that, in general, ELL students were limited in using grade level academic-content vocabulary in their writing pieces. Due to the above findings, PS 294 curriculum planning team has prioritized the needs of the ELL instructional team by equipping classrooms with authentic native language arts libraries and Spanish leveled literacy books for the upcoming school year 2018-2019. The ELL planning team has also re-focused its home language arts planning sessions and has devoted more emphasis to providing professional developments geared to training teachers on best practices for teaching native language arts. For both, English and Spanish literacy, the curriculum planning team decided to plan thematic-based units that embed the academic vocabulary and content knowledge ELLs need to be able to write cohesive writing pieces and to be successful in their grade level reading assignments. The data calls for the re-rearrangement of inter-visitations to facilitate sharing of best teaching practices. September 2018 assessments are being utilized to create early Extended Day ELL Programs and to differentiate instruction according to students' need during the course of the school day. For instance, in the forth grade, six ELLs are identified as having no formal academic education (SIFE). Similarly, in grade four there were five students without formal academic schooling, three in grade three and two in grade three. These groups are now going to be scheduled to be part of our during-the-day Academic Intervention Program for remedial instruction using Wilson Fundation Phonics and the Five Pilars of Literacy, which promotes the five essential components of successful reading: Phonemic awareness, phonics, fluency, vocabulary and comprehension. This intervention program is supplemented using Estrellita to target dominant Spanish-speaking ELLs. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? PS 294x employs a diversified-structural approach to support the ELL team efforts of servicing and assessing this special population. An assessment team has been created to support ELL educators on conducting assessment rounds that include F & P and DRA running records and ELL Period Assessments. The team provides all necessary assessment forms, administer assessments to individual students, cover classes to release classroom teachers to perform assessments and help on interpreting and analyzing assessments data. The curriculum planning team, on the other hand, writes unit performance tasks as teacher-made assessments and set calendar dates for their administration, collection and analysis of the results in collaboration with classroom teachers. The school administration has also decided to invest in placing a full time Bilingual Pupil Service Paraprofessional in one of the TBE classrooms to facilitate more frequent data collection during guided reading instruction and during student-teacher conferencing. Having a second pedagogue in the classrooms makes it easier for the main classroom teacher to write logs and to maintain individual student postings, which are important components of our school informal assessments process. A similar administrative decision was made to benefit ELL students in our ENL program. An additional TESOL certified teacher was hired to reduce the group-sizes of ELLs who receive ENL instruction in monolingual classrooms, thus facilitating more attention to individual assessments and to the academic needs of each group. Language Paraprofessionals of low-incidence languages in the community were also assigned to monolingual classrooms containing ELLs to create a link between their families and the school. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? The Bilingual Coordinator, Principal and School Leadership Team have set goals in all subject areas, for all of our students including ELLs to monitor their progress three times a year. The measure of success of our ELLs will depend on the progress 8  shown on the goal set for a particular subject area. For instance, in ELA/HLA our ELLs' success is being evaluated based on how many reading levels ELLs go up as measured by Fountas & Pinnell/DRA, as well as how students' written responses progress according to end of unit performance tasks administered using school-planned thematic unit. Narrative and Informational writing rubrics are being used to grade the writing pieces and track progress throughout the year. Likewise, in mathematics students were assessed using the Envision Math Assessment in the beginning of the year. That data drives small group instruction in the classroom and helps the SLT determines which ELL students will participate in Extended Day and/or Saturday Academies. Some identified areas of needs focus on strengthening the link between home academic enforcement and school instruction (particularly among families of ELLs); as it is the urgency to alphabetize an inflow of illiterate upper grade ELLs that has exceeded our ELL team during the school day capacity and school expectation. As the school administers initial screening assessments, as the SIFE Oral Questionnaire, the ELL team has come to the realization that the number of illiterate ELLs has been consistently increasing over the years. Thus, the need to start up early extended day program and academic intervention for those students is prevalent. In the ENL Program our ELLs success is being evaluated depending on their improvement exhibited as they approach mastering of each of the targeted language modality, as measured by the ELL Periodic Assessment and by Spotlight On English End of Unit Assessments, both administered every three months throughout the school year. In addition, the success of both, the Transitional Bilingual Program and the ENL program is also being evaluated based on how many ELLs transition to monolingual and/or go up at least one level on the NYSESLAT, thus contributing to meeting the school Annual Measurable Objectives (AMAO) and our school Annual Yearly Progress (AYP). Social studies progress is measured using End of Unit Benchmark Assessments that are aligned to the State of New York Department of Education Scope of Sequence. Science knowledge, on the other hand, is measured before teaching every lesson, by applying a knowledge inventory approach called "Five Practices of Science", from which science lessons are derived based what the students bring in or what they are locking. Every lesson is then wrapped up by engaging students in meaningful discussions that incorporate content knowledge and science related vocabulary learned through the lesson. In addition, both Science and social studies, are also measured according to how students' demonstrate science or social studies knowledge and content vocabulary usage in their oral and written communication in different assignments regardless of the area of content or genre. Holistically, the success of our TBE program is being assessed on its effectiveness to produce well-rounded educated and balanced bilingual/bi-literate students who can demonstrate academic and social proficiency in all four language modalities (listening, speaking, reading and writing) in both languages: English and Spanish. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? The school is using cumulative data to address interventions and to create a program model which main goal is to develop the language abilities of homogeneously grouped participants sufficiently enough to move them from their entering/emerging level into the transitioning or expanding level, and subsequently move this last group to the commanding level, as measured by the NYSESLAT scores. Such a program model is being evaluated based on how many ELLs meet the targeted objective. Additionally, another program model has been created where the main objective is to increase the reading level of a particular ELL group as measured by Fountas and Pinnell in grades K-5. This program evaluation is based on whether or not this objective was met. Some of the data being considered for the above programs includes students' reading level, NYSESLAT modalities and overall scores and teacher's made assessments. Students are being instructed in small groups using lessons supported by lots of visuals and models, followed by an exposure to guided reading targeting the skill/concept just taught. ELL students are given priority when determining extra support our students. ELL students participate in extended day programs and are part of our grade specific academies. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] PS 294X has in place a Tier III RTI Program for ELL students in grades K-5 who are still struggling with understanding concept of print. Instruction for these ELL groups may begin with helping them understand that reading is done from left to right, follow 9  by helping them realize that words are put together to make sentences that carry out ideas and feelings. Instruction is then moved to having students follow with their finger simple texts by identifying the sound each word makes in a sentence; eventually moving them to sounding out the initial sound of each word in a text or the words they have learned to recognize. A biweekly goal targeting a particular skill is created for each group, which may be changed the following term if students have mastered the targeted skill. The above described model is made possible by structuring instruction in TBE classroom in differentiated groups, served by two pedagogues and/or by pushing in an additional out-of-classroom support staff member (as needed) each instructional day. As part of our Tier III RTI Program, the school also employs the second edition of Wilson Foundations to instruct struggling readers in word sounds and phonics. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. The data related to proficiency levels on the NYSITELL reveals that most of the students in kindergarten are either becoming commanding or moving up one or two levels yearly (20 out 24 students), with 15 of those students becoming commanding or English proficiency and the remaining 5 moving up at least 2 levels. This data and the information collected from the parent responses on the Home Language Survey, suggest that many of our incoming Kindergartens are now being exposed to a pre-schooling or Head-Start experiences where English is the dominant language before entering kindergarten. Having this knowledge is crucial for planning ELL instruction at the kindergarten level. Provision of additional ELL personnel is necessary to facilitate instruction in smaller groups, thus allowing more individualized attention to this group in order to further their English language development. On the other hand, the Spring 2018 NYSESLAT data (across performance levels and grades) reveals that there was a significant improvement on moving our last year second graders (now incoming third), as our last year fourth graders (now incoming fifth) to higher levels of English proficiency, or transitioning them into a monolingual setting. To put this on perspective, 13 out 14 fourteen students, or 92.86%, of last year's second graders moved to third grade with at least two or more NYSESLAT higher levels than when they were in grade two. A similar scenario was witnessed with our upcoming fifth graders. Ninety percent or 20 out of 22 last year's fourth graders, moved up to fifth grader exhibiting an increase in their NYSESLAT current levels. Unfortunately, similar results were not evident with last year's first graders, where only 62.5 percent move up from their current level and 18.75% did not move. As a result of this data, the school has scheduled time for one of our ENL teacher to share best instructional practices with our current TBE first grade teacher through modeling lessons and by pushing-in to support the non-moving students in small group, and an additional Paraprofessional has been designated to support small group instruction in that TBE classroom. Similarly, additional planning emphasis to support this cohort of students during an extended day program in which one of our specialized TESOL teachers, Linnet Olmo, has been put in charge of instructing the group. According to the fourth grade Spring 2018 NYSESLAT scores, however, the data is more evenly balanced across proficiency levels, with the entering level being slightly lower (one student out of 25, equal 4%). In this grade, the majority of ELLs are transitioning or expanding (ten students) with only four (4) students at the emerging level and eleven or 44% who became commanding during Spring 2018 NYSESLAT. The current data shows that the higher the grade, the least number of ELLs scoring at the entering or emerging level. This information is very encouraging to continue the differentiated instructional model that our school has putting in place over the years. Overall, for this upcoming school year 2018-19, our school ELLs population has more students at the expanding and commanding levels combined than in all the other levels added together. PS 294 uses a variety of ELA results to evaluate our ELL Programs and to make data driven instructional decisions. In addition to using Fountas and Pinnell (grades K - 5), ELL English Periodic Assessment (grades 3 - 5) and End of Unit ELA Performance Tasks, our school also analyzes ELA items obtained from the Spring 2018 NYS standardized ELA test. Interpreting the different skills tested on the ELA and the overall performance of ELLs in this assessment, help us understand the areas where our ELLs are demonstrating strength or weakness, and the grade where we need to focus our attention for professional development opportunities or for class/group restructuring. The 2018 grade 4 and 5 ELA results show that over 55% of our ELLs are performing at or above grade level (score of 3 or 4). This is to show that the time invested in assessing and analysing those assessments data are yielding positive results for our ELLs present and future academic lives. 0  As in ELA, math itemized analysis is done using the NYS Math Standardized Exam as a base to determine areas of celebration as areas of concern. An action plan is then developed to reverse those areas of concern. Once again, this effort has generated impressive results for our ELL population. The Spring 2018 NYS Math exam indicates that 83 percent of ELLs and former ELLs tested in grades 3-5 scored at a level 3 or 4. Those encouraging results are an indication that our ELL students are on their way to continue a healthy math academic pathway. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? The overall school schedule was strategically created to permit professional developments for all personnel who work with ELLs or in a setting that contains ELLs. The ELL Coordinator, TBE and TESOL/ESOL licensed teachers conduct professional developments during Common Preps for non-ELL teachers and paraprofessionals on topics related to applying best instructional practices to serve English Language Learners enrolled in the ENL Program. At these professional development sessions, data findings are discussed and the implementation of an action plan and goals are set forth to begin servicing a needy group of ELLs that has been targeted in a given ENL setting. Each group is analyzed separately, but for all the groups being studied; materials, service providers, strategies, scheduling, frequency and duration of service are put into place. This same model is utilized by TBE and ENL personnel during their regular weekly meeting. Similarly, the school schedule has a built-in time for ELL personnel to meet once a week for 45 minutes to receive professional development from outside professionals, or a member of the school team to share strategies and ideas on how to interpret data findings in order to better serve targeted groups of needy ELLs. This time is also used to turn key on previously attended professional developments. Our school has also carefully crafted a yearly schedule to facilitate that our Transitional Bilingual and ENL teachers attend at least 50% of total hours PD to ELL-specific professional developments, as mandated by CR Part 154. As our ELL team's expertise grows, PS 294x has equally planned to use their expertise to provide the state required 15% professional development for all teachers on ELL-specific topics. Action plans and findings are disseminated and shared with the overall school community at these professional development sessions. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. Currently, in our Freestanding English as a New Language program (ENL), P.S. 294x will be servicing a total of one hundred ten (110) English Language Learners of which ninety eight (96``````````````````````````````````````````````````````````````````````````) are general education ELLs and twenty eight (14) belongs to the Special Education Program of English Language Learners. English Language Learners in our ENL Program will be `````````````````````````````````````````````````````receiving integrated and standalone ENL units of study and staffing requirements in accordance with CR Part 154.2, as follows: Entering and Emerging ELLs will receive a total of two (2) units of ENL or 360 minutes (8 periods of 45 per week) of which one (1) unit or 180 minutes will be devoted to instruction of Standalone ENL with the objective of developing ELLs' English language skills so they can succeed in core content courses. The remaining 180 minutes or the equivalent to one unit, will be implemented via integrated instruction to build English language skills through content area instruction in social studies, science and mathematics. This component of ELL services will be the responsibility of our dually certified TESOL/ESOL teachers, Linnet Olmo and Miguelina Suriel. Transitioning ELLs, on the other hands, will be receiving half of an unit (90 minutes) of integrated ENL instruction and a half of an unit of standalone ENL. As a way to better serving Entering, Emerging and Transitioning ELLs a combined 1  model of instruction/service provider is necessary. Our dually certified TESOL teachers will be teaching the integrated ENL minutes through the block model to heterogeneously grouped students. However, ENL teachers will also service homogeneous groups of ELLs to provide them with their mandated Standalone ENL mandated minutes and to make up for any missing minutes to entering, emerging and/or transitioning students, not covered by the integrated ENL instructional time. Similarly, expanding and commanding ELLs will also be serviced applying the integrated ENL model described above in groups of mixed proficiency levels (heterogeneous). The only noticeable variation in these two groups is that expanding ELLs will receive an entire unit of integrated ENL instruction, whereas commanding ELLs will only receive a half of an unit or 90 minutes. As Part 154.2 mandates, all required minutes described above will be provided on a weekly basis. b. TBE program. If applicable. Similar as in our ENL Program, ELLs in the Transitional Bilingual Program are to receive their mandated services in the areas of ENL/ELA, Bilingual Content Area Subjects and Home Language Arts, as well as, NYSED stipulated staffing requirements in accordance with CR Part 154.2. As in the ENL Program, our TBE Program will serve 112 general education bilingual ELLs whose proficiency levels range from entering to expanding in every grade from K-5. Similar to the ENL Program, the TBE Program will service Entering and Emerging ELLs with 360 minutes (2 units) of ENL. One of those units of study will be taught using the ENL Standalone model and the other one implementing the integrated model through the teaching of science, social studies and mathematics. Transitioning and Expanding ELLs in this program, however, are to get 180 minutes (one unit) of ENL instruction divided into 90 minutes of standalone ENL and 90 of integrated ENL. The instructional model previously described will be accomplished through differentiation of direct teacher's instruction and through the provision of differentiated materials and resources as a way to scaffolding the delivering of lessons. As a way of differentiating ENL instruction, a Transitional Bilingual Education certified pedagogue in every grade will provide integrated ENL through science, math and social studies two times per week in cycles of six weeks. A Transitional Bilingual sub-teacher or a bilingual Paraprofessional will also be planning and pushing in every TBE classroom to assist in facilitating differentiated instruction and to help provide a partial portion of the required standalone ENL instruction. Any number of missing minutes per proficiency level will be covered by our fully certified ELL Coordinator, Mr. I. Sanchez. All students who are part of PS 294x Transitional Bilingual Program are entitled and will receive a 45 minutes daily period of Home Language Arts, Monday through Friday, regardless of their English Proficiency Levels, as stated in the state mandates. In addition to the Home Language Arts instruction these students in TBE classes are getting, they are also to receive the state mandated Spanish content area subjects instruction, as follows: Entering and Emerging ELLs are to receive a minimum of two (2) forty five (45) minutes daily periods of content area subjects in the students' native language. This requirement differs for transitioning and expanding students who, in turns, are going to receive only one daily native language content area subject, or the equivalent to 45 minutes. The providers of this last service are going to be TBE teachers with bilingual extension only. c. DL program. If applicable. Our school does not offer a Dual Language Program 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? English Language Learners in our English as a New Language Program will be receiving integrated and standalone ENL units of study and staffing requirements in accordance with CR Part 154.2, as follows: Entering and Emerging ELLs will receive a total of two (2) units of ENL or 360 minutes, of which one (1) unit or 180 minutes will be devoted to instruction of standalone ENL with the objective of developing ELLs' English language skills so they can succeed in core content courses. The remaining 180 minutes or the equivalent to one unit, will be implemented via integrated instruction to build English language skills through content area instruction as social studies, science and mathematics. This component of ELL services will be the responsibility of our dually certified TESOL/ESOL teachers, Linnet Olmo and Miguelina Suriel. Transitioning ELLs, on the other hands, will be receiving half of an unit (90 minutes) of integrated ENL instruction and a half of an unit of standalone ENL. Our dually certified ENL teachers will be teaching the integrated ENL minutes through the block model to heterogeneously grouped students. On the other hands, ENL teachers will also service homogeneous groups of ELLs 2  to provide them with their mandated standalone ENL mandated minutes and to make up for any missing minutes to entering, emerging and/or transitioning students, not covered by the integrated ENL teacher. Similarly, expanding and commanding ELLs will also be serviced applying the integrated ENL model described above in groups of mixed proficiency levels (heterogeneous). The only noticeable variation in these two groups is that expanding ELLs will receive an entire unit of integrated ENL instruction, whereas commanding ELLs will only receive a half of an unit or 90 minutes. As Part 154.2 mandates, all required minutes described above will be provided on a weekly basis. English Language Learners in the Transitional Bilingual Program are to receive their mandated services in the areas of ENL/ELA, Bilingual Content Area Subjects and Home Language Arts, as well as, NYSED stipulated staffing requirements in accordance with CR Part 154.2. Our TBE Program will serve 115 general education bilingual ELLs whose proficiency levels range from entering to expanding in every grade from K-5. Similar to the ENL Program, the TBE Program will service Entering and Emerging ELLs with 360 minutes (2 units) of ENL. One of those units of study will be taught using the ENL Standalone model and the other one implementing the integrated model. Transitioning and Expanding ELLs in this program, however, are to get 180 minutes (one unit) of ENL instruction divided into 90 minutes of standalone ENL and 90 of integrated ENL. The instructional model previously described will be accomplished through differentiation of direct teacher instruction and through the provision of differentiated materials and resources as a way to scaffolding delivering of lessons. All students who are part of PS 294x Transitional Bilingual Program are entitled and will receive a 45 minutes daily period of Home Language Arts, Monday through Friday, regardless of their English Proficiency Levels, as stated in the state mandates. In addition to the Home Language Arts instruction these students in TBE classes are getting, they are also to receive the state mandated Spanish content area subjects instruction, as follows: Entering and Emerging ELLs are to receive a minimum of two (2) forty five (45) minutes daily periods of content area subjects in the students' native language. This requirement differs for transitioning and expanding students who, in turns, are going to receive only one daily native language content area subject, or the equivalent to 45 minutes. During the daily 180 minutes allocated ELA, ELL students in grades Kindergarten to fifth use a school planned ELA units of study. The breakdown of the allotted ELA time is as follow: • 20 minutes are devoted to word study and phonemic awareness. • 20 minutes to shared reading with emphasis on a specific skill • 40 minutes are being utilized for reading aloud with a purpose and for whole group instruction. The whole group is then divided into smaller groups for re-teaching and re-enforcement of the literacy concept/skill taught that day (Reading Workshop). Finally, this session is concluded with a RTI session centered on small guided reading activities using LLI- Leveled Literacy Intervention, -published by Fountas & Pinnnell. • 20 Writing Workshop. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. Our Freestanding ENL team plans thematic based units collaboratively with the general education team to align ENL instruction and resources to the general education curriculum, in all subject areas, in order to make content comprehensible to our ELL population. Some of the resources used for alignment include: literacy leveled books of the same topic (usually written at a level lower than the supporting texts and/or anchor text); a comprehensive academic English program in content and literacy, titled Spotlight on English by Santillana; and a well-balanced collection of fiction and non-fiction books, on a variety of topics, that are used to teach targeted grade-level literacy skills. Advanced and proficient ELLs in our TBE program are being exposed to the same academic curriculum and rigor as the general education classes, scat-folded when need it. Although entering and emerging ELLs are being exposed to the same thematic unit topics, their instruction is being scat-folded and differentiated by aligning it to resources that cover the same academic content, but are written in a more ELL friendly approach. Some of the resources used for alignment include: literacy leveled books of the same topic (usually written at a level lower than the supporting texts and/or anchor text); a comprehensive academic English program in content and literacy, titled Spotlight on English by Santillana and an electronic 3  based personalized digital learning program called iReady. iReady applies an adaptive diagnostic mechanism that gives a comprehensive diagnose of an individual student learning needs, monitor student growth over time, and predict student proficiency on rigorous state assessments. Science and social studies are taught to TBE ELLs through parallel teaching in our Science-Social Studies Lab, where a licensed TBE cluster or classroom teacher plans and teaches collaboratively with the science and the social teachers, instructing Entering and Emerging ELLs in their native language. Any missing science or social studies periods are taught in their respective TBE classrooms by TBE licensed teachers, where the students are grouped according to their language proficiency level to differentiate language of instruction and written language of materials used. A similar model is used to teach mathematics in TBE classrooms. In our ENL program, ESOL and TESOL teachers teach science, social studies and mathematics via differentiated content-integrated English as a New Language Units. Teaching of content areas are language-differentiated. For instance, an expanding group of ELLs sitting a TBE classroom receive content in English, while entering and emerging ELLs receive the same content in their home language simultaneously. This model is made possible by having an additional TBE teacher push-in the TBE classroom at the time the main classroom teacher is teaching one of the content areas. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? Throughout the school year ELLs in the Transitional Bilingual Program will be appropriately evaluated three times a year using a Spanish Fountas & Pinnell running records kit titled: Sistema de evaluación de la lectura for grades K-2 and Spanish DRA for grades 3-5, as well as, supplemented Estrellita Assessments for illiterate ELLs in grades K-3, which are conducted at least once a week. In addition, our school has decided to use the Native Language Arts periodic assessment sponsored by the New York City Department of Education, which administer three times per year. Our ELL team analyzes patterns encountered in these multiple assessments to make instructional adjustments, create goals, re-structure student groups or re-assign team members to fit the current needs of our ELL population. Kindergartens in TBE classes will also be assessed early in the year using a school created home language assessment that measures students ability in all four language modalities. At the end of every Home Language unit, ELL students must write an Unit Performance Task in Spanish to demonstrate the skills and content learned in their home language during their HLA instructional block. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status A. Initially, SIFE students are administered the SIFE Oral Questionnaire to determine the family and student's higher academic level reached and habits of study. Next, using Fountas & Pinnell in English and Spanish, the school determines a starting point to initiate an instructional level of a SIFE student. Estrellita is also used as an initial assessment tool when a student is below level C in F & P. At this point instruction begins for the SIFE student using the resources mentioned above and a well-trained Bilingual Pupil Service (BPS) Paraprofessional who is assigned to TBE and ENL classrooms under the guidance of the classroom teacher for the school year. The classroom teacher and the BPS candidate plan collaboratively and define each other role within the lesson plans to reflect the differentiated components of groups of diverse abilities. Bilingual Pupil Service are also required to maintain records of ongoing assessment and students' progress, which is monitored by the school administration and used to re-arranged the instructional level, as needed. The main classroom teacher and Bilingual Pupil Service paraprofessional have both been trained on the second edition of Wilson Fundations to be used to teach phonics and word sounds to SIFE ELLs. B. As evidenced by the results of September 2018 Spanish LAB, NYSITELL and Fountas & Pinnell Running Records, the new waves of ELL students who are enrolled in our school Transitional Bilingual Program and in our ENL program are coming in with excessively low level of literacy skills in their native language as well as in the second language language. Due to this reason, the school has put into place an ELL Literacy and Math RTI program that services at risk ELLs using a program called Leveled Literacy Intervention (LLI), published by Fountas & Pinell, designed for English literacy development. Estrellita is also used to 4  develop literacy their Spanish native language. These groups receive instruction three times per week for 45 minutes. Newcomers are also homogeneously grouped and served in their classroom by a Bilingual Pupil Service provider (BPS) using a program titledSpotlight on English by Santillana. C. Developing English Language Learners are being exposed to the same academic curriculum and rigor as the general education classes. However, depending on the language proficiency level a given group, instruction may have to be scat-folded and differentiated by aligning it to resources that cover the same academic content, but are written in a more ELL friendly manner. Some of the resources used for alignment include: literacy leveled books of the same topic (usually written at a level lower than the supporting texts and/or anchor text of the unit of study); a comprehensive academic English program in content and literacy, titled Spotlight on English by Santillana and the electronic based individualized instructional program called iReady. D. Our Long Term ELLs receive Academic Intervention Services with our I.E.P teacher and her Paraprofessional. The I.E.P. teacher delivers instruction to a small group of twelve students. The teacher also administers exam with mandated accommodations as, directions read aloud, questions read aloud and extended time. The teacher also provides scat-folded instruction. The Paraprofessional provides leveled literacy intervention in small groups with no more than four students. E. Former ELLs are being kept under the radar of the ELL team and their mainstream teacher (Bilingual teachers, TESOL/ESOL teachers, ELL Coordinator and child's classroom teacher) who are making instructional and programming adjustments as needed, depending on the student's classroom performance. These ELLs are also placed in various programs during the day and after school according to their academic strengths or weakness. In some instances, some former ELLs are invited and encouraged to participate in our after school ENL/ELA programs. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? Some of the instructional strategies used by teachers of ELL-SWDs include: modeling, using listening centers and books on tape, providing students with sentence stems and models for writing, oral language development, contextualization, and elaborating and enriching what their classroom content calls for. Teachers use the same curriculum and materials that teachers in general education classroom but they modify the activities according to the functioning level of their students. For example, activities that may be difficult for a child to work on independently are assigned as partner or group work so students can work in collaboration. Students are given extra time to complete tasks. Specific step by step directions are provided with directions read and reread, if necessary. For students reading far below grade level, phonics and vocabulary building activities are built into the literacy block. Teachers use visual aids and manipulative. The use of technology for classroom instruction is another way our school supports all ELLs, but ELL-SWDs in particular. Every ELL student in our school has been assigned a iReady account with his/her own password to log-in. The student's teacher assigns reading books on topics that support the literacy and academic content curriculum at their current reading levels. In addition, every ELL classroom has been equipped with a Smart Board that teachers use to develop interactive and visually accessible lessons. To ensure that ELL-SWDs receive all services mandated in their IEPs, there is a service calendar that is updated daily through SESIS. Our service providers also sign a Provider-Sign In-Out Sheet for school records. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? ELL-SWDs spend time with non-disabled peers during ENL instruction. Students are grouped according to level of English proficiency, so groups of mixed abilities from general education and from special education programs work together to complete school projects. We have ELL-SWDs in Integrated Co-Teaching classes where 60% of the students are general education students and 40% of the students have an IEP that calls for team teaching. Some of our IEP students are mainstreaming in general education classes for the subject areas of ELA and Math. ELL-SWDs also spend time with non-disabled peers during physical education, lunch, and when participating in our after-school programs and activities. Our school encourages teachers to meet with their colleagues to plan educational activities that will benefit ELL SWDs. A block common prep has been built in the teachers' program so they can meet as grade teams. A common prep has been built in the program 5  for Special Education Department to hold meetings. This planning meeting time was also arrange for the ELL Department throughout the school year. An after school ENL program is established to provide extra support beyond the classroom with emphasis on state test practice in both ELA and the NYSESLAT to which ELL-SWDs students are invited to participate with ELLs in the general education program. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. ELLs identified at risk work with an assigned RTI teacher in a supplemental morning block. Some of targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math and other content areas are as follow: • Individualized and small group instruction instruction based on specific needs in ELA, Mathematics and all subject areas, as needed, provided by the school RTI team during the school day. • Small group instruction in HLA and Spanish Math provided by a Bilingual certified teacher during the school day. • An ELLs after school program that focuses on strengthening ELL students’ knowledge and content-related language in ELA, Science, math and Social Studies. The students' native language is used to clarify concepts/ideas, as needed, during small group instruction and in the classroom if necessary. • Small group instruction instruction based on specific needs in ENL provided by the school ENL and Bilingual teachers. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? Starting this year and continuing for the upcoming school year 2018-2019, The Walton Avenue School is seeking to improve our services for ELLs. Our plan is to increase the time students spent on independent reading in school and at home. The school will be expanding students' participation in computer program as iReady. We are also looking into strengthen the writing skills of our ELL students by providing modeling and teaching students about the CCLS writing standards, focusing on most genres of writing. In addition, we will increase the number of ELL service providers in our ELL Department. For school year 2018-19, we have reserved three (3) Bilingual Pupil Service (BPS) Providers to become part of our ELL staff. We have also connected with the Bronx Field Service Center team to assist our school in building professional capacity among ELL staff, including BPS Paraprofessionals, in the area of co-teaching strategies, being that BPS Paraprofessionals are going to be co-teaching in TBE classrooms. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? N/A. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. At the Walton Avenue School ELLs are afforded equal access to all school programs. Our classes of ELLs are equally scheduled to participate in all of PS 294x special programs as music, swimming, school wellness, science and arts classes. Similarly, expanding and commanding ELLs participate in after school and Saturday academy programs parallel to the ones designed for our monolingual population, with the exception that ELL programs are taught by TESOL certified teachers and/or teachers with a Bilingual Extension. English Language Learners also participate in the learning of the same curriculum units of study as our monolingual students do, with exception that the ELL curriculum planning team makes the necessary instructional adjustments to make input comprehensible to our ELLs. As in previous years, this school year, PS 294x will provide Entering, Emerging and Transitional ELLs with another after school program that will begin in February 2019 and will end in May of 2019. Participant ELLs in these programs will focus on strengthening their reading, writing, and math skills. In addition, PS 294x ELLs are encouraged and invited to participate in other after school programs sponsored by New Settlement After in School. Subgroups and Grade Levels of Students to be Served for 2018-2019 School Year Transitioning/Expanding Kindergarten After-School ELL Program PS 294 will offers an ELL After School Program for Transitioning kindergarteners. The main objective of this program will be to serve as a jump-star into reading by focusing on multi-sensory instruction in phonemic awareness, phonics and vocabulary development. Ample opportunities will be provided for social-interactive activities that incorporate the use of manipulative. In 6  this program, English will be the language of instruction. This program will invite 13 students who fall into the mentioned category. Materials to be used for this program will include: Finish Line New York for ELLs 2019 Edition by Continental Press and Spotlight on English (a supplemental ENL phonetically-based and language development program published by Santillana). In addition, a leveled literacy intervention program by Fountas & Pinnell is also going to be used for students' exposure to repetitive sight words as well as sentence and expression patterns. The cost of Finish Line NY for ELLs 2019 Edition will come out of the Title III Immigration Supplemental Funds. However, the school will provide the Leveled Literacy Intervention Program. These materials are supplemental and distinct from materials used for daily instruction. This program will take place on Wednesdays and Thursdays for a hour and a half from 2:30 - 4:00 pm and will be ran from January 10, 2019 through May 17, 2019. Instruction will be provided by our fully certified 1-6 Elementary kindergarten bilingual teacher, Ricky Yagual. Entering-Emerging 3-5 After School ELL Program PS 294 will also an ELL After School Program that supports Entering-Emerging English Language Learners, as evidenced by their NYSESLAT/NYSITELL levels. The goal of this program is to increase English acquisition and language learning by engaging students in social-interactive activities designed to strengthen students’ speaking and listening abilities by employing a multi-sensory approach to teaching. Class instruction will incorporate the use of manipulative, visuals, models and plenty of TPR techniques. In addition, students will learn targeted sight words and content-based vocabulary embedded in the core curriculum that will help them accelerate reading fluency and comprehension. Language of instruction will be English. Fifteen students are being targeted for this program. This program will take place on Wednesdays and Thursdays for a hour and a half and will run from January 10, 2019 through May 17, 2019 from 2:30-4:00pm. The service provider for this program will be our school fully certified 1-6 Elementary TBE teacher, Vellanire Barran. Materials to be used for this program are: Spotlight on English, published by Santillana and a Leveled Literacy Intervention Kit by Fountas and Pinell. Materials cost for this Entering-Emerging ELL Program will not be paid using Title III money since our school already possesses those materials. The targeted language of Instruction for this program will be English. Transitioning-Expanding First/Second Graders After School Program Apart from the above programs offered, our school will also open an After-School Program for grade one and two ELLs at the transitioning or expanding Level. This program will focus on strengthening the academic content, academic language and literacy skills tested on the NYSESLAT. The main objective of the program will be to equip these students with the social studies, science and math content-based academic language and knowledge to move them to a commanding level on the Spring 2019 NYSESLAT. Emphasis will also be placed on developing the vocabulary and reading sophistication skills necessary to be successful on non-fiction sessions of the NYSESLAT. This objective will be accomplished by engaging students in activities and tasks that explore in depth the academic content knowledge and non-fiction reading skills until mastering them. The language of instruction in this program will be English. Fifteen students will be invited to participate in the program. Materials to be used include: Finish Line New York for ELLs 2019 Edition, supplemented by Getting Ready for the NYSESLAT, 2019. Those materials are not being provided by the school, thus the cost will come out of Title III Funds Supplemental Program. This program will take place on Wednesdays and Thursdays for an hour and a half from 2:30-4:00pm and will be ran from January 10, 2019 through May 17, 2019. Instruction will be provided by our ENL fully certified 1-6 Elementary Bilingual and TESOL teacher, Miguelina Suriel. The targeted language of instruction for this program will be English. Third and Fourth Grade Transitioning/Expanding After School Program PS 294X has also designed an ELL After School Program that supports English Language Learners who scored at the Transitioning or Expanding level on the Spring 2017 NYSESLAT or Spring 2019 NYSITELL in the third or fourth grade. The goal of this program is to increase English language acquisition and language learning by engaging students in social-academic interactive activities designed to strengthen students' listening, reading and writing skills. In addition, students will learn targeted math, science and social studies content-based concepts and vocabulary, embedded in the NYSESLAT and ELA core curriculum that will help them accelerate non-fiction reading fluency and comprehension. Language of instruction will be English. Fifteen students are being targeted for this program. The program will take place on Wednesdays and Thursdays for a hour and half and will run from January 10, 2019 to May 17, 2019 from 2:30-4:00pm. The service provider for this program will be our school fully certified 1-6 Elementary TBE teacher and ESOL teacher, Linett Olmo. The materials to be used for this program are: Guided reading non-fiction academic content-books, non-fiction audio books and Finish Line New York for ELLs 2019. This last mentioned material will be the only resource that will be paid using Title III Immigration Funds Supplemental 7  Program. Our school ELL Program already possesses the Guided reading and audio books. For each targeted group, there will be a total of 33 sessions that will be extended to the duration of the program. All records, including student attendance and program notification sent in parents' preferred languages will be kept in room 301B to be available for review. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. To support ELLs, the school employs a variety of instructional materials. To develop English proficiency, grades K-5 are equipped with Spotlight on English by Santillana, a thematic unit ENL program that combines guided reading and phonics to provide the language literacy and content instruction necessary to launch ELLs into academic success. Similarly, every ELL classroom has been equipped with a modern Smart-board and an Elmo Projector, a Mac-Book Air Lap-top programmed to be Smart-board compatible, a Mac 25 inch Desktop and a brand new listening center and four Microsoft compatible Lap-tops for students' to do research. To continue developing and maintaining students native language and cultural values, ELL classes have been provided with Spanish authentic libraries published by Benchmark Education. Furthermore, TBE classes have been provided with cultural relevant classroom libraries and all of our classes in the Transitional Bilingual Program have received all Core Curriculum and content area materials in both languages (English and Spanish) to make possible the different daily minutes of language allotments instructional time mandated by New York State Education Department, depending on ELLs level of proficiency in English. English Language Learners also use technology to further re-enforce classroom concepts using web-based programs as iReady, Star-fall, Brian Pop, Youtube for Kids and Cool Math. ELL teachers use this latest technology to supplement unit concepts included in our ENL program-Spotlight on English and to re-enforce unit related vocabulary through the use of visuals and interactive teaching activities. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? The Transitional Bilingual classes have a built-in 45 minutes daily block devoted to native language instruction where all ELLs are participants regardless of their proficiency level in English. Furthermore, throughout the school day, content area subjects are taught to ELLs in the native language according to their respective number of minutes mandated by the state based on their English proficiency level. At any given point during the instructional day, however, any ELLs who ask to get clarification in their language about a concept or skill taught, we do so as a mean of scat-folding. In each TBE classroom, home language instruction is delivered applying a differentiated approach, where our BPS Paraprofessional absorbs a low or middle HLA language functioning group, while the main TBE teacher works with the rest of the students in his/her class. Within our ENL program, ELLs native language support is only delivered when students request that type of scat-fold. Mainstream teachers, who have ELLs sitting in their classrooms, have been made aware that ELL students can get clarification of contents, concepts or skills in their native language, if needed, and the step to take if they feel it will benefit their ELLs. In addition, our school has Spanish speaking Language Paraprofessionals within our ENL Program servicing and providing language support for our I.E.P ELLs. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. Materials used for instruction, services support, resources and special Community Based Organizations programs are adequately planned to meet grade level and age appropriate criteria. In addition, our services, resources, and materials used are aligned to the New York State Common Core Learning Standards and are correlated to meet Part 154.2 (K-8) mandates. All of our TESOL licensed ENL and TBE extension teachers are encouraged to use the students' native language, whenever possible, to clarify concepts taught to those students who may need the home language support to re-enforce new learning or to help them internalize difficult content and concepts. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? PS 294 shares a co-location with PS 311-The Lucero School. Both schools share some common resources, human and non-human resources, as an effort to ensure that all ELLs' needs are met, academically, linguistic, and socio-emotional. Speech and 8  Language Teachers, School Counselors, Occupational Therapists and School Psychologists are just a few of the common human resources being shared by both schools. In order maximize the effectiveness and productivity of specialized personnel, principals and staff members from both schools collaborate to coordinate staff professional developments and Parent Workshops on topics related to activities to do in the classroom and at home; how to help students to follow protocols; developing reward systems and scheduling routines in the classroom and at home for students with specialized needs. Both schools also collaborate together to service community families in other activities that include: Food Pantry which is sponsored by Food Bank of New York to provide food security to families in need, starting with families living in public shelters and temporary housing; Community Wide School Forum and Family Fitness Fun Night. Similarly a Building Wide Safety Committee that is comprised by members who represent both schools collaborate on projects like developing a building wide safety plan, maintenance of building safety condition and improving community safety in coordination with the local police department. These two schools also coordinate and collaborate the usage of some common spaces within the building. Both schools share the same school library, school cafeteria, auditorium and the yard. A schedule is posted in each of these locations for staff members from both schools to log-in the time, topic and date when a space is being reserved for a professional development session that is opened to both staffs. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). Before the beginning of the school year, the school scheduled parents and children of newly enrolled ELLs to come to school to meet the school Principal and ELL staff members including the Parent Coordinator. At that meeting parents were informed about the support the team will be providing to them and their children throughout the school year. Parents were also provided with the name and contact information of key ELL personnel to discuss their child's ELL related issues. Parents were given a tour around the building and were asked to give as much academic and social developmental information about their child as possible. Subsequently, the children were administered the NYSITELL and the Spanish LAB. Once the NYSITELL scores get scanned and the results are obtained, parents are sent either the entitlement or non-entitlement letter. Those parents of entitled ELLs are invited to orientation meetings, where they select a program for their children after receiving program related materials and watch the parent video. In September and throughout the school year, we also conduct other Parent Orientation meetings targeting parents of newly enrolled English Language Learners and those who did not show up during the first rounds of orientation in spite of multiple attempts from the school. Before students begin school, we give them a tour of our building and introduced them to their teacher and available staff members. The first ENL unit of study for our incoming Kindergarten and new-comer English Language Learners is titled "All About School". 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? Language electives are not part of our elementary school program. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? PS 294X does not offer a Dual Language Program. 9  Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? The overall schedule was strategically created to permit professional developments for all personnel who work with ELLs. The ELL Coordinator, TBE and ENL teachers conduct professional developments during Common Planning time for teachers and paraprofessionals to train them on developing lessons and applying best practice strategies to serve English Language Learners enrolled in our ELL Programs. In addition, the school-wide schedule has a built-in time for ELL personnel to meet once a week for 45 minutes to receive professional development from outside professionals or from School Professional Development Teams. An assigned ELL team representative attends grade meetings to share ELL best practices with mainstream teachers. Our school has carefully planned a yearly schedule to facilitate that our Transitional Bilingual and ENL teachers attend at least 50% of total hours PD to ELL-specific professional developments, as mandated by CR Part 154. As our ELL team's expertise grows, PS 294x has planned to use their expertise to provide the state required 15% professional development for all teachers on ELL-specific topics. A school common practice is to assign an ELL team representative to attend grade meetings to share ELL best practices with mainstream monolingual teachers and to meet with other school personnel such as Psychologists, Speech Therapist, Guidance Counselors and the School Leadership Team, as needed, to make sure ELL related issues and practices are being met. Furthermore, the ELL Team offers ELL-related trainings to the entire school pedagogy personnel during our general-school weekly staff meeting. Some of the topics covered at these meetings include: 1) Unpacking the NYSESLAT for Instructional Implication (September 2018) -Mr. I. Sanchez 2) Available Effective Resources and Support for ELLs and Non-ELL Educators: Language Progression (October 2018) - M. Suriel & I. Sanchez 3) Who is an English Language Learner? How is his/her academic success measured in a TBE and in an ENL Program? (November. 2018) -Emma Ventura & R. Yagual. 4) Available Language Translation and Interpretation Services (LTI) December 2018 - I. Sanchez 5) Program Choices Offered by NYS Education Department to ELL Students (January 2019)- Kelly Campoverde 6) Understanding the Real Needs of ELLs: Beyond Lesson Planning; Beyond Lesson Delivery (February 2019)-M.Suriel and Sanchez 7) Differentiated & Scat-folded Strategies for ELLs in Monolingual Classes using UDL (March 2019) - L. Olmo 8) Academic Work Teachers Can Expect from ELLs Based Language Proficiency Level (April 2019)- 9) Identifying Relevant and Interactive Materials to Plan Meaningful Content-Based ELL Instruction (May 2019) T. Rodriguez. 10) What is the Language Allocation Policy; Language Interpretation Plan and Title III Plan? (June 2019)- I. Sanchez Our ELL teachers also receive professional development on topics as: Developing higher order thinking and questions (teachers and students); Implementing meaningful/collaborative discussions in the classroom; How to develop performance tasks aligned to Common Core State Standards; How to analyze NYSESLAT/NYSITELL, Math, F&P and HLA Running Record Assessments for Instructional Implication. Specific PD was provided on how to implement the DOE-endorsed CCLS aligned math curriculum: Envision 2.0. The instructional coaches (Isidro Sanchez, Shannon Nilan, Nicole Perkins, Assistance Principal and Daniel Russo, School Principal) model lessons, co-plan, and co-teach with teachers struggling to implement the curriculum. Some of these professional development sessions are also offered during Election Day PD, Faculty Conferences Days and during Lunch and Learn sessions. Agendas, attendance logs, minutes, and copies of literature and materials used are kept on file in room 301 and at the main office. Bronx Field Support Center also provides training off-site throughout the year to which ELL teachers are registered to attend. In addition, teachers participate in student inquiry teams, where they look at student work in relation to specific skills of the CCLS and expected task rubrics in order to adjust instruction to reflect gaps in students' achievement. Our ELL Coordinator and selected school ENL teachers, Bilingual Teachers, School Pupil Secretary and Paraprofessionals are also registered to receive professional developments sponsored by the Office of English Language Learners at Central. Some of the topics our school targets for professional development are: State/City ELL mandates, Identification and Placement Process, Instructional Strategies and Interventions for Classroom Implementation, as scaffolding, vocabulary building and academic language development. Any of the components above will come at no cost to Title III. 0  Professional Development Calendar September Date 1: September 17, 2018 Time: 2:20 - 3:20PM Topic: Unpacking the NYSESLAT: Instructional Implication Presenters: Isidro Sanchez, ELL Coordinator & Linnet Olmo, ENL Teacher Staff Members to receive training: Miguelina Suriel, Mercedes Casado, Taisha Rodriguez , Ricky Yagual, Kelly Campoverde, Roxanna Vargas and Bilingual Pupil Service (BPS) Paraprofessionals. October Date 2: October 1, 2018 Time: 2:20 - 3:20PM Topic: Sharing Effective ENL Strategies Through UDL (Universal Design for Learning) Presenter: Miguelina Suriel, Certified TESOL & ENL Teacher Staff Members to receive training: Isidro Sanchez, Linnet Olmo, Mercedes Casado, Taisha Rodriguez, Ricky Yagual, Kelly Campoverde, Roxanna Vargas and BPS Paraprofessionals. November Date 3: November 6, 2018 Time: 2:20 – 3:20PM Topic: Improving ELL Data Availability for Instructional Advantage Providers: Kay O'Connor, School Data Specialist and Isidro Sanchez, ELL Coordinator Staff Members to receive training: Mercedes Casado, Taisha Rodriguez, Linnet Olmo, Ricky Yagual, Kelly Campoverde, Roxanna Vargas, Miguelina Suriel and BPS Paraprofessionals. December Date 4: December 10, 2018 Time: 2:20 – 3:20PM Topic: Using the DOK to Guide Your Lesson Questioning Provider: Nicole Perkins, Assistance Principal Teachers to receive training: Miguelina Suriel, Linnet Olmo Taisha Rodriguez, Kelly Campoverde, Isidro Sanchez, Roxanna Vargas, BPS Paraprofessionals and Ricky Yagual. December Date 5: December 17, 2018 Time: 2:20 – 3:20PM Topic: Creating Short Term Objectives and Long Term Goals for Differentiated Groups Provider: Lisa Alves, Literacy Coach and Isidro Sanchez, ELL Coordinator Teachers to receive training: Miguelina Suriel, Kelly Campoverde, Taisha Rodriguez, BPS Paraprofessionals, Roxanna Vargas, Linnet Olmo and Ricky Yagual. January Date 6: January 7, 2019 Time: 2:20 – 3:20PM Topic: Interpreting and Complying with LAP & LTI Plans Provider: Isidro Sanchez, ELL Coordinator-Leads Discussion: ELL Team Share Reflections Teachers to receive training: Miguelina Suriel, Vellanire Barran, Mercedes Casado, Linnet Olmo, Taisha Rodriguez, BPS Paraprofessionals, Roxanna Vargas, Kelly Campoverde and Ricky Yagual. January Date 7: January 14, 2019 Time: 2:20 – 3:20PM Topic: Using Available Technology to Supplement Classroom Instruction Providers: ELL Team Share-out Session Teachers to receive training: Miguelina Suriel, Kelly Campoverde, Taisha Rodriguez, Isidro Sanchez, Linnet Olmo, Roxanna Vargas, BPS Paraprofessionals and Ricky Yagual. February 2019 1  Date 8: February 4, 2019 Time: 2:20 – 3:20PM Topic: Planning Meaningful Academic Content-Based ENL Instruction for ELLs Providers: Miguelina Suriel, ENL Teacher and Kelly Campoverde, Four Grade TBE Teacher Teachers to receive training: Linnet Olmo, Taisha Rodriguez, Isidro Sanchez, Roxanna Vargas, BPS Paraprofessionals and Ricky Yagual. February 2019 Date 9: February 11, 2019 Time: 2:20 – 3:20PM Topic: What and How to Teach HLA to Re-enforce ENL/ELA? Providers: Isidro Sanchez, ELL Coordinator Teachers to receive training: Miguelina Suriel, Kelly Campoverde, Taisha Rodriguez, BPS Paraprofessionals, Linnet Olmo, Roxanna Vargas and Ricky Yagual. March 2019 Date 10: March 11, 2019 Time: 2:20 – 3:20pm Topic: Discovering the Benefits of Close Reading with ELLs Provider: Lisa Alves, Literacy Coach Teachers to receive training: Miguelina Suriel, Kelly Campoverde, Taisha Rodriguez, BPS Paraprofessional, Isidro Sanchez, Roxanna Vargas, Linnet Olmo and Ricky Yagual. March 2019 Date 11: March 25, 2019 Time: 2:20 – 3:20PM Topic: Identifying the Instructional and Arti-fact Elements Needed in a TBE and a ENL Classroom Providers: A Team Collaborative Creation of Charts-Principal, Daniel Russo leads discussion Teachers to receive training: Miguelina Suriel, Linnet Olmo, Kelly Campoverde, Isidro Sanchez, Taisha Rodriguez, Roxanna Vargas, BPS Paraprofessionals and Ricky Yagual. April 2019 Date 12: April 8, 2019 Time: 2:20 – 3:20PM Topic: Strategies to teach Math to ELLs with Disabilities Provider: Nicole Lent, Math Coach Teachers to receive training: Miguelina Suriel, Kelly Campoverde, Taisha Rodriguez, Roxanna Vargas, BPS Paraprofessionals, Isidro Sanchez and Ricky Yagual. April 2019 Date 13: April 29, 2019 Time: 2:20 – 3:20PM Topic: Benefits of Using Thinking Maps for ELL Instruction Providers: Shannon Nilan, Literacy Coach and Taisha Rodriguez, TBE Teacher-Grade 1 Staff Members to Receive Training: Isidro Sanchez, Kelly Campoverde, Miguelina Suriel, Linnet Olmo, Roxanna Vargas, Ricky Yagual and BPS Paraprofessionals. May 2019 Date 14: May 6, 2019 Time: 2:20 – 3:20PM Topic: Is it Language, or Is it Cognitive: The LPT Process Presenters: Miguelina Suriel, ENL Teacher, Assisted by Mr. Sanchez Staff Members to Receive Training: Kelly Campoverde, Ricky Yagual, Taisha Rodriguez, Linnet Olmo, BPS Paraprofessionals, Roxanna Vargas. June 2019 Date 15: June 10, 2019 Time: 2:20 – 3:20PM 2  Topic: Identifying Relevant Technology and Interactive Materials for a Summer Fun of Learning Providers: Taisha Rodriguez, TBE Grade One Teacher and Mr. Chin, Librarian Staff Members to Receive Training: Isidro Sanchez, Miguelina Suriel, Linnet Olmo, Kelly Campoverde, Roxanna Vargas and Ricky Yagual and BPS Paraprofessionals. The listed professional development sessions positively impact the progress of ELLs because what the team learns at those PDs is implemented and puts into practice in the ELL classrooms. The team also assesses the effectiveness of the implementation by sharing and having open conversations about how each of the learned experience is affecting students' learning. Adjustments are then made as need it. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. Our school is carefully planning a yearly schedule to facilitate that our Transitional Bilingual and ENL teachers attend at least 50% of total hours PD to ELL-specific professional developments, as mandated by CR Part 154.2. This team of professionals will attend professional developments offers by the "DELLS Office" and the Bronx Field Support Center ELL Department. Assigned PD attendance is based on assessed personnel needs and on team members expressed desire of growing professionally in a specific field. As our ELL team's expertise grows, PS 294x has planned to use their expertise to provide the state required 15% professional development for all teachers on ELL-specific topics. Agendas, minutes and distributed materials are maintained in the Principal's binder in the main office as records. In addition, records are also kept in the ELL Coordinator's Office for review. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? At PS 294x ELL parents' needs and concerns are accommodated to the best of our school personnel abilities. One to one meetings are scheduled with the Principal, Assistance Principal, Parent Coordinator, I.E.P Team and ELL Team Personnel or a combination of two or more of the mentioned school personnel to accommodate each ELL parent's individual needs. Parent outreach takes different forms at PS 294x. Parents are reached via phone calls, school letters, in person meetings, via the Automatic Voice System, etc. For every meeting held, the person in charged of conducting such a meeting, maintains a log, a signing sheet, and notes taken from the meeting. Some of the meetings are scheduled following parents' suggested best time to meet. In addition, ELL teachers and other ELL team members schedule individual parent meetings every Tuesday of each week (during the city-wide parent involvement time) to discuss programs goals, language development progress, language proficiency results and language development needs in all content areas. Paraprofessionals and other staff members who speak languages as Arabic, African-derived dialects, French, Bengali and Spanish are notified prior to individual meetings take place to serve as interpreters or translators as needed. In the event that the language of the parent is not represented in the school, the teacher or staff member facilitating the meeting reaches out the Translation and Interpretation Unit to request a three-ways call to communicate with the parent. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Our parents are given multiple opportunities throughout the school year to participate in informal meetings denominated "Coffee Friday with the Principal" where he and his Support Team informally converse with parents about their opinions, feelings, concerns and ideas for improvement regarding the school. In addition, parents' questions are answered by a staff member who has expertise in the field asked. At this meeting, the Parent Coordinator discusses the school calendar and upcoming parents and students' events for the month. The Parent Coordinator also offers opportunities to parents to schedule 3  face to face meetings, as needed, to discuss any concerns parents may have. Also, she sends a monthly newsletter to parents, pastes fliers depicting parents' information and contacts parents via the school messaging system to remind them of school-related events. Furthermore, during the year our school offers parents of English Language Learners an opportunity to take English as a Second Language and computer classes once a week for two hours in our building. This is an attempt to have parents of ELLs be better equipped to support their children at home with their English homework assignments. Community engagement events are also being held at our school throughout the year. Some of those events include open houses for parents, meet-the-teacher sessions, parent orientation sessions and curriculum rounds with parents. At each of these events, bilingual teachers and translators have been available to speak specifically to the TBE and ENL program. A comprehensive brochure was distributed in multiple outlets within the community that highlight every aspect of the school, including the TBE program. An open house night exclusively for students entering the TBE program. During open house night, we modeled instruction for parents and explained how instruction is being divided between English and Spanish. For every school event, the Principal, Assistance Principal and Parent Coordinator put into place protocols to facilitate translation services by assigning members of the school personnel to serve as language resources for the multiple languages represented in the community of parents. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Starting school year 2018-2019 and thereafter, members of PS 294 staff will be providing assistance to fourth and fifth grader ELLs as they prepare to transition from elementary to middle school. Our Parent Coordinator, ELL Coordinator , ELL teachers, Guidance Counselor and/or the school Administrative Team will arrange visits to diverse middle schools, including charter schools, to bring information back to be shared with our fourth and fifth grade ELL students and parents. After the information has been shared and our students and parents have expressed their respective interests about their schools of preference, we will proceed to facilitate arranging parent/students visits (accompanied by members of our staff) to further discuss the school with middle school personnel and/or middle school administrative teams. We will also make possible that our ELL students, parents and selected school staff participate in middle school fairs where more specific questions and concerns can be answered for them. A school assigned contact person will be assist ELL students and parents complete all related middle school applications and other paper work. This person will be a direct contact to ELL students and parents and will serve as the link between the parents and the middle school, facilitating an ongoing connection and a smooth transition. 4 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Daniel Russo, Principal , testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 5  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: THE WALTON AVENUE School DBN: 09X294 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Daniel Russo Title Principal Nicole Perkins Assistant Principal Jose Cabassa Parent Coordinator Miguelina Suriel ENL/Bilingual Teacher Joseph Cruz Parent Kelly Campoverde-TBE Teacher Isidro Sanchez Teacher/Subject Area Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach School Counselor Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 10/11/18 10/11/18 10/11/18 10/11/18 10/11/18 10/11/18 10/11/18 6  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 09X294 School Name: WALTON AVE. Superintendent: Leticia Rodrigu The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Isidro Sanchez ELL Coordinator Yes Miguelina Suriel ENL Teacher Daniel Russo Principal No No Yes Yes Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. Assessment •The school Parent Coordinator (Arleen Powell) reviewed Parent Meetings and Conference Records and Agendas *Mr. Sanchez, ELL Coordinator, Miguelina Suriel and Linnet Olmo, ENL Teachers, reviewed Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey to determine parents' language of preference both oral and written. •The School Leadership Team referred to the Demographics Section of the School CEP •The School ENL teachers, Miguelina Suriel and Linnet Olmo, and Mr. Sanchez analyzed ATS Adult Preferred Language Report (RAPL), BNDC and ELPC reports. 7  *Members of the ELL Team consulted previous years' Bilingual Teachers, ENL teachers, Mainstream Teachers, Special Education Teachers, Parents and the longevity personnel to report findings at their ELL common meeting time. •Mr. Russo, Mr. Jose Cabassa and Mr. Sanchez participated in Parent Meetings/Workshops and assessed Languages Spoken by Attendees. •Mr. Russo and Mr. Sanchez conducted informal language surveys during ‘Parent/Teacher Conferences’, School Open House Days and during ELL Parent Orientation Meetings. Parents' home language was determined through a series of steps including parent intake interviews with each family, reviewing of Home Language Surveys, interviews with Parent Coordinator, review of ATS language code. The bilingual coordinator maintains a file of all ELL students and, with the help of the Parent Coordinator, they indicate whether the parents are English speaking, or speakers of other languages. In the event that a parent meeting is required, this file is reviewed and appropriate translation is provided. This system is further supported by the review of blue emergency cards, which indicate the language of preference for parent contact. The school employs staff members fluent in the following languages: Arabic, Bengali, Italian, Mandinka, Mossi Spanish and Soninke Prior to arranging translation through the Interpretation Unit in Queens, the school explores the option of programming a staff member to provide translation services in-house. At initial School Leadership Team meetings, the principal shares the results indicated above. The Parent Association President and the parent coordinator review these results and use them for planning purposes of parent outreach events. The bilingual coordinator prints out the RAPL report indicating parents' language of preference and places a copy box in every staff member's mailbox. which serves as a shared platform that can be used in our school community to disseminate information. The staff is aware that it is their responsibility to review all documents shared in their mailbox. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Arabic Fulani Bengali French Haitian Creole Mandinka AKA Mandingo Soninke English Spanish 7 2 2 2 1 5 5 220 269 1.36 0.39 0.39 0.39 0.19 0.97 0.97 42.9 52.4 7 2 2 2 1 5 5 220 269 1.36 0.39 0.39 0.39 0.16 0.97 0.97 42.9 52.4 8  3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. N/A Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Newsletter Monthly Families Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. Staff at PS 294 are able to translate information in the following languages: Arabic, Bengali, Italian, Mandinka, Mossi Spanish and Soninke Families who prefer a language which our staff does not speak will be provided the information by using Language Line Staff at PS 294 are able to translate information in the following languages: Arabic, Bengali, Italian, Mandinka, Mossi Spanish and Soninke. Calendar Monthly Families who prefer a language which our staff does not speak will be provided the information by using Language Line 9  Field trip notices As needed Staff at PS 294 are able to translate information in the following languages: Arabic, Bengali, Italian, Mandinka, Mossi Spanish and Soninke. Families who prefer a language which our staff does not speak will be provided the information by using Language Line Letters are printed out in the top 9 languages from the intranet or translated by staff. Parent Teacher Conference Quarterly Families who prefer a language which our staff does not speak will be provided the information by using Language Line Letters are printed out in the top 9 languages from the intranet or translated by staff. Testing information Quarterly Families who prefer a language which our staff does not speak will be provided the information by using Language Line Staff at PS 294 are able to translate information in the following languages: Arabic, Bengali, Italian, Mandinka, Mossi Spanish and Soninke. Instructional Round Letter As needed Teacher specific communication letter to parents As needed Families who prefer a language which our staff does not speak will be provided the information by using Language Line Staff at PS 294 are able to translate information in the following languages: Arabic, Bengali, Italian, Mandinka, Mossi Spanish and Soninke. 0  School Celebration Letter As needed Families who prefer a language which our staff does not speak will be provided the information by using Language Line Staff at PS 294 are able to translate information in the following languages: Arabic, Bengali, Italian, Mandinka, Mossi Spanish and Soninke. All other languages may be translated by Translation Interpretation Unit. Families who prefer a language which our staff does not speak will be provided the information by using Language Line 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide *Parent Teacher Conference / Open House Curriculum Day Conducted in September, November, March and May of every school year Parent workshop monthly interpretation service(s)? Staff at PS 294 are able to interpret information in the following languages: Arabic, Bengali, Italian, Mandinka, Mossi Spanish and Soninke At parent teacher conferences school administration develops a plan to assign personnel on every floor to facilitate interpretation services as needed. Families who prefer a language which our staff does not speak will be provided the information by using Language Line. Parents are also given an option to have an over the phone conference using language Line on a different date to avoid long hold time when using language line on Parent Teacher conference day. conference The school ELL Coordinator, Mr. Sanchez and school Bilingual Personnel support PTA and the Parent 1  Tuesday Parent Engagement Weekly Family Instructional Academic Rounds. once a month IEP meetings As needed Coordinator providing oral translation at every meeting /workshop held at our school. If needed school will provide an on site interpreter for languages not covered by staff upon request by either using a DOE vendor or staff member. Language Line is used to communicate with families during this time or out of the classroom person. Ex: paraprofessional, main office staff, or school aide Staff at PS 294 are able to interpret information in the following languages: Arabic, Bengali, Italian, Mandinka, Mossi Spanish and Soninke. If needed school will provide an on site interpreter for languages not covered by staff upon request by either using a DOE vendor or staff member. Staff at PS 294 are able to interpret information in the following languages: Arabic, Bengali, Italian, Mandinka, Mossi Spanish and Soninke. If needed school will provide an on site interpreter for languages not covered by staff upon request by either using a DOE vendor or staff member. with Special Education background. If no one is available for the meeting and the parent is in agreement Language Line may be used as well. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. Staff at PS 294 are able to interpret information in the following languages: Arabic, Bengali, Italian, Mandinka, Mossi Spanish and Soninke. If staff member is not available Language Line will be used to inform parent of any emergency. School will also send out vital information using School Messenger in the preferred language of the parent. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. 2  As part of PS 294x initiative to meet the state compliance of 15% of all Professional Developments for all staff to be ELL Specific PDs, our school will provide workshops to all staff members regarding Chancellor's Regulation A-663 of September 2018. The following documents will be given to staff members to meet the compliance. a. Chancellor's Regulation A-663 b. Bill of Parent Rights and Responsibilities which includes their rights regarding translation and interpretation services c. Distribute the Language Identification Guide to office staff and train them in using the guide to help determine the language spoken by a parent. d. Distribute Language Line information to all staff members including safety agents and remind them of the steps on how to obtain an interpreter for LEP visitors to the school. Internal letter will be sent out to all school staff at least three times a year reminding them of their responsibility to communicate with LEP parents and what resources are available to them to do so. e. Will schedule a DP with the Field Language Access Coordinator to provide a Language Access Training. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) The Welcome Language Poster is displayed outside the main office assuring families that the school speakers their language. A poster with pictures of staff members and the languages they speak is displayed in the main office so that parents are able to point out if needed the person and language they need. All parents will be provided with a copy of the Parent's Bill which is pre translated in the 9 covered languages by the Translation Interpretation Unit. of Rights and Responsibilities to inform them of their rights regarding translation and interpretation services. Parents will also receive a copy of the Expect Success Guide, published by the DOE to outline language services provided by central. 3  In addition, posters regarding visitor access in covered languages are displayed by the primary entrance to ensure that parents are not prevented from reaching the office due to language barriers. The school also uses funding for translation and interpretation to facilitate the translation of documents in covered and non-covered languages. Before any scheduled meeting parents who prefer a language other then English are asked via language Line or staff if they require interpretation. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? Our school Parent Coordinator and the Office of Parent Teacher Association keep a Parent Suggestion Box where parents drop suggestions of a surveyed area the school would like to improve, or any other suggestions they may have. The box will travel to Parent meetings to collect surveys about the quality and availability of services in our school, including translation & interpretation services. As in other instances, parents will be encouraged to suggest ways our school can improve translation and interpretation services already being offered. Furthermore, PS 294 Parent-Teacher Association is a very active team that conducts informal surveys at virtually every meeting held to monitor the quality of offered services. 4 
