 10X433 School Name: HIGH SCHOOL FOR TEACHING AND THE PROFESSIONS Principal: KAMELE MCLAREN 2018-19 CEP-CS 1  Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC)   School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information Teaching & the Professions High School 321000011433 9 - 12 School Number (DBN): 10x433 2780 Reservoir Ave, Bronx, NY 10468 (718) 329-7380 (718) 329-7381 Phone Number: Kamele McLaren kmclaren@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Geographical District: 10 Superintendent’s Office Address: Fax: Email Address: Roberto Hernandez Seth Gilman Cynthia Robinson Alfonso Giordano Athena Rosa Chelsea Taveras Madeline Marmalejos Lynette Bermudez District Information Carron Staple Superintendent: 1 Fordham Plaza, Bronx, NY 10458 cstaple@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: (718) 741-5834 Phone Number: (718) 741-7098 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC)   FSC: Bronx Jose Ruiz Executive Director: 1 Fordham Plaza, Bronx, NY 10458 Executive Director’s Office Address: Executive Director’s Email Address: (718) 741-7070 jruiz2@schools.nyc.gov Phone Number: Fax: 718-828-7777   Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Roberto Hernandez Seth Gilman Cynthia Robinson Alfonso Giordano Athena Rosa Chelsea Taveras Madeline Marmalegos LynetteBermundez Kamele McLaren Jacqueline Marrero *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable CSA Rep Parent Representatives   Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Effy Marketos Frank Wilson BrunildaPagan UFT Parent Representative Parent Representative Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/   Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with   the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement   Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Section 4: CEP Overview Vision We, the High School for Teaching and the Professions, will support and challenge our students to collaborate and think deeply as they read, write, and discuss for understanding and learning.   Mission We are committed to becoming an active laboratory for implementing, reflecting upon and refining practices leading to student success and professional growth for all stakeholders. The reflective and collaborative nature of our environment will foster a steadfast focus on caring relationships, high expectations, and opportunities for participation and contributions for all members of our school community to ensure positive outcomes. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. The High School for Teaching and the Profession is a small high school which focuses on pre-teaching careers and cisco networking certification. Students at T&P have the opportunity to take advance placement courses in US History, English Literature, English Language, Statistics and Spanish. Our school was awarded a community school grant for the 2014-2015 school year and we are partnered with Sports and Arts Foundations as our primary community based organization. We also have partnerships with Lehman College and Monroe College in which students have the opportunity to take college courses and earn college credit. Other CBOs we partner with are Good Shepherds Services, Montefiore Medical Center, Partnership with Children, and Center for Supportive Schools. The High School for Teaching and the Professions will focus on the core values surrounding: ● Critical and high order thinking skills ● Exposure to real world connections that build students’ skills and connect students with the workplace and college ● Gathering and analyzing data to support the differentiation in developing instructional strategies for our students ● Teachers as facilitators ● Integrating literacy skills across all courses ● Develop a school community that reflects and works collaboratively to enhance the teaching and learning for our students, families and staff 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. Our data currently shows us having 29% ENL and 26% IEP students. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. 0  Areas of Progress: ● Supportive Environment ● Strong Family-Community Ties ● Trust ● Collaborative Teachers For 2016-2017 school year we received a Well-Developed for 1.4 (Positive Learning Environment) and Proficient for all remaining quality indicators on our Quality Review. This review resulted in an improvement in a score of Developing for 1.2 (Pedagogy) and 2.2 (Assessment) to a Proficient for both of those areas. The reviewer stated “school leaders and staff provide a safe learning environment for all students that supports their social-emotional growth through various structures based on a theory of action, built on social emotional growth and designed so that all students feel secure.” It was also noted that teachers frequently collaborate using established protocols to analyze student work products to support next instructional steps. Teachers are provided with a voice in developing their professional learning sessions and an as active member on the principal’s instructional cabinet. Areas of Focus: ● Rigorous Instruction Even though we improved in our areas of focus from the prior year, our school community believes that we should continue to deepen our efforts in 1.2 (Pedagogy) and 2.2 (Assessment) resulting in positive outcomes for students and improved practice for teachers. 1  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 10X433 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 09,10,11,12 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 447 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 23 20 9 6 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 3 5 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) 4 School Composition (2017-18) 90.0% % Attendance Rate 87.7% % Reduced Lunch 21.7% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.0% 77.0% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 3.6% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 4.1 0% 6% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation 73% 62% 78.6% 0.9% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A NO N/A N/A NO Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A NO N/A N/A NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A YES N/A N/A YES No N/A 145 103 1 5 79.8% 2.2% 25.3% 16.1% 2.5% 0.9% 4 30% 7 N/A N/A 74% 66% 69.9% 4% N/A No No N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A NO N/A N/A N/A N/A NO N/A N/A N/A N/A YES 2  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. The High School for Teaching and the Professions (T&P) has developed a successful model for instituting important elements of the Danielson Framework for Teaching. As indicated in the Quality Review, T&P has an effective system for communicating high expectations and a well-maintained structure of training and accountability. As a result, at T&P “all students have a voice in school related issues,” (Quality Review, 2017). The school leaders at T&P ensure that curricula are aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards as well as content standards to integrate the instructional shifts. T&P has effectively implemented “curriculum documents reflected instructional shifts, higher order thinking and alignment to the Common Core Learning Standards,” (Quality Review, 2017). The curricular coherence at T&P has ensured the instructional rigor necessary for college and career readiness for all students, including English language learners and students with disabilities. The High School for Teaching and the Professions requires an increased focus on demonstrating student ownership (Quality Review 2017). Additionally, we must continue to focus on ensuring that teachers use or create assessments, rubrics, and grading policies that are consistently aligned with the school’s curricula. Finally, our teachers must continue to deepen their practice in aligning their assessments and rubrics to the curricula, checks for understanding and monitor student self-assessment; this will allow teachers to create a more visible teaching and learning environment as well as facilitate a more timely and effective method of providing critical feedback to the students regarding their individual learning goals and academic achievement. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, as a result of our teams' increased focus on using data to inform instruction, we will have an increase of 5% pass rate for the 11th graders (cohort 2020) taking the US History Regents exam, moving from 63% in SY' 2017-2018 to 68% in SY' 2018-2019. 3  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Social Studies team will begin to meet in the summer to analyze student level assessment data, student work, and units to support instructional planning and action plan goal setting. Social Studies team will create their Problem of Practice inquiry action plan and engage in collaborative inquiry weekly using our school-wide inquiry protocol. SS 9-12 Grades SS 9-12 Grades Social Studies team will engage in administering and monitoring school-wide assessments. ELA 9-12 Grades SS, ENL and SWD Coordinators will support the SS teachers to ensure the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH) are met. SS 9-12 Grades July 2018 – June 2019 Administration and SS teachers September 2018 – June 2019 September 2017 – June 2018 September 2018 – June 2019 All SS teachers All SS teachers All SS teachers, Administration, ENL and SWD coordinators 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Family Night Event in September 2018 will provide the opportunity for our team to engage families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and the Common Core in order to support their children at home. Grade Team Town Hall meetings will be conducted throughout the year to support communication and targeted support to families. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. See below Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A 4  X C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded X In Kind X Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, 11th grade students will show an increase in one level on their US History writing assessments (DBQ and Thematic essays). Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) Review of inquiry team logs, units, tasks, student data, and assessments. All instructional work will be shared with parent leaders and families through various opportunities such as SLT meetings, parent workshops, and parent learning walks. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 5  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? A review of the school’s Learning Environment Survey, our school progress report, on-going discussions with students and families, low inference collected at our end of year school community retreat we have determined there was a need to provide additional services to support transition for incoming ninth grade students and to provide targeted support to a cohort of students that historically have structure at T&P. Strengths: ● Grade Teams ● SIT Team ● Weekly Attendance Meetings Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 10th grade students will be engaged in our AVID instructional program using AVID strategies to support their learning, resulting in 5% increase of students in cohort 2021 earning 10+ credits a shift from 79% June SY' 2018 to 84% SY' 2018-2019. 6  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Grade Teams –The 10th grade counselor along with grade advisors will engage in targeted summer meetings with students and families to review their 9th grade performance and develop individualized graduation plan (IGP) for year two. 10th grade students Summer to October 2018 10TH grade counselor and grade team Weekly academic in-semester support (AIS) will provide students, not completing their assignments, an opportunity to make up their assignments or re-take assessments. 10th grade students Targeted academic support will be provided to students with academic needs, such as IEPs, ENLs, etc. 10th grade students September 2018 to June 2019 September 2018 to June 2019 10TH grade counselor and grade team Lower House Grade Team 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Grade Team Town Hall meetings will be conducted throughout the year to support communication and targeted support to families. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. We will use our PROSE model schedule to support these activities in addition the funding streams in Part 4b. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded X X Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 7  By February 2019, 80% of the 10th grade will earn 5+ credits for the first semester. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Review STARS mid-year credit accumulation data for the 10th grade Review Progress Reports Review of AIS logs Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 8  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. A review of our school’s inquiry team data for Mathematics department indicate progress in the team’s practice in revising units, tasks, and assessments to provide access for all learners. A review of the June 2019 Algebra data indicate that further work is required to support an increase in student outcomes for this assessment area. The data shows that 34% passed the Algebra assessment. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, the Mathematics inquiry team members will collaboratively analyze student data to design differentiated instructional supports for targeted students, resulting in a 10% increase for 9th grade students taking the Algebra I assessment. 9  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? The 9th grade tasks will be revised to support differentiated supports. All Math teachers Students will be identified and programmed for a support math course. 9th grade students Math teacher will engaged in various focused professional learning sessions and learning walks. Math Teachers Summer 2018 to June 2019 Math Teachers Administrator September 2017 to June 2018 September 2018 to June 2019 Teacher leaders Math Teachers Administrators Math Teachers Teacher Leaders Administrator 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Family Night Event in September 2018 will provide the opportunity for our team to engage families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and the Common Core in order to support their children at home. Grade Team Town Hall meetings will be conducted throughout the year to support communication and targeted support to families. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. We will use our PROSE model schedule to support these activities. This will allow us to use our circular 6 time to support both our instructional prep work and tutoring support. 0  OTPS: Thinking Through Math to support differentiated instructional support. We support after school and Saturday Academy academic support sessions for students using per session funds. In addition to using the funding streams below. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, 100% of the 9th grade students will have engaged in the taking a mock regents exam. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Algebra I Mock Regents Assessment Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 1  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. A review of our school’s Advance data, teacher work products, and our quality review indicated that our teachers have improved in their planning and student level engagement tasks. A review of our school’s Advance data, teacher feedback, and student work products indicated that further support for teachers will be needed for Component 3d. This deeper focus in component 3d will help improve our instructional focus and result positive outcomes for students and teachers. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, school leaders will create and implement a professional learning plan that builds teacher capacity to use assessment in instruction techniques resulting in a 30% increase in teachers improving 1 performance level in Advance for Component 3d of the Danielson Rubric. 2  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Engage in teachers in school-wide and targeted professional learning (PL) opportunities. All teachers Engage teachers in learning walks focused around targeted components. All teachers Engage administrators and teacher leaders in on-going PL focused in key topics supporting our school-wide PL plan and needs. All teachers September 2018 to June 2019 September 2018 to June 2019 September 2018 to June 2019 Administrators and teacher leaders Administrators and teacher leaders Administrators and teacher leaders Review key student and teacher work products to ensure maximum support for all students and teachers. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Engage SLT parents in learning walks to assess and monitor impact Communicate to families overview of our professional learning plan Provide monthly updates to our SLT on our PL plan. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. We will use our PROSE model schedule to support these activities in addition to the funding stream below. The funding streams below will help support the hiring of teacher leaders to support our professional learning sessions and ongoing teachers support. 3  Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, 100% of teachers will have 2 observations completed and engage in 1 learning walk to support our focus area. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Advance data Learning walk data Teacher reflection documents Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 4  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. A review of the Learning Environment Survey showed a 3% drop in positive results for Supportive Environment. A strength in the survey shows that in Strong-Family Community Ties there was a 6% increase in positive results. This strength will allow our school community to engage our families along with key stake holders in a parent inquiry team to analyze our school survey and other data metrics to support an improvement in communications and other data metrics that impact our community. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, we will increase our parent engagement opportunities aligned to our college and career readiness priorities resulting in an overall parental approval rating increase of 5% as measured by the parent portion of the school survey. 5  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? A parent inquiry team will be formed supported by the school community school director, parent coordinator, PA president and SLT members. This team will review our learning environment survey to determine an area of focus and work throughout the year to address this area. Parent Leaders The parent inquiry team will hold information sessions throughout the year to inform all families, in addition to families of students with IEPs and ELL students. All Parents Additional targeted PL opportunities will be provided to families around our college and career priorities. All Parents November 2018 until June 2019 Administration, CBO, PA, SLT members, Parent Coordinator and selected parents November 2018 until June 2019 November 2018 until June 2019 Administration, CBO, PA, SLT members, Parent Coordinator and selected parents Administration, CBO, PA, SLT members, Parent Coordinator and selected parents 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. Our CBO NY Edge and Grade teams will support ongoing family support through various workshops throughout the school year. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. In addition to the funding streams below, we will use our Community School Budget and our PROSE schedule to support the action steps in for this goal. Per session will support our after school parent PL sessions. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other 6  Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, our parent inquiry team will have an action plan and completed two meeting sessions. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Minutes from the parent inquiry team sessions -Google doc inquiry team reflections with next action steps Parent PL Plan Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 7  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Students: -reading below their grade level -failed ELA regents Mathematics Students: -below their grade level in math -failed math regents Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) -Implementation of our school-wide literacy plan -Targeted class designed to bring students up to grade level in the 9th grade through the implementation of a blended class with Achieve 3000. -Credit accumulation program Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Programs will be delivered to students in following methods: Programs will be offered: -During the school day -One on one instructional support -After school -Small group instructional support -Weekends -Summer -Online learning instruction aided by licensed teachers -tutoring by teachers -Weekly tutoring -Saturday Academy -Native language course for ELLs -Implementation of our school-wide literacy plan -Targeted class designed to bring students up to grade level in the 9th grade through the implementation of a Programs will be delivered to students in following methods: Programs will be offered: -During the school day -One on one instructional support -After school -Small group instructional support -Weekends -Summer 8  Science Students: -reading below their grade level -failed science regents Social Studies Students: -reading below their grade level -failed a social studies regents At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Students not completing assignments or completing them unsatisfactorily blended class with Think Through Math. -Credit accumulation program -Online learning instruction aided by licensed teachers -tutoring by teachers -Weekly tutoring -Saturday Academy -Implementation of our school-wide literacy plan -Credit accumulation program -Weekly tutoring -Saturday Academy Programs will be delivered to students in following methods: Programs will be offered: -During the school day -One on one instructional support -After school -Small group instructional support -Weekends -Summer -Native language course for ELLs -Online learning instruction aided by licensed teachers -tutoring by teachers Programs will be delivered to students in following methods: Programs will be offered: -During the school day -One on one instructional support -After school -Small group instructional support -Weekends -Summer -Online learning instruction aided by licensed teachers -tutoring by teachers -small group instructional support -one on one instructional support - Afterschool - Saturday Academy -AIS -Implementation of our school-wide literacy plan -World History elective course -Credit accumulation program -Weekly tutoring -Saturday Academy -Native language course for ELLs -Students are identified by teacher and/or PupilPath -Students receive assistance from their subject area teacher 9  through our weekly AISprogram -peer to peer tutoring -tutoring by teachers 0  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) There are currently 21 students in temporary housing. 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. We have designed a STH Focus team that will ensure that students receive the supports to which they are entitled in accordance with the McKinney Vento Act. The team will ensure that families/students in temporary housing are supported by offering solutions and connecting them with resources including, but not limited to those noted below: Full access to academic programs & educational support services   Basic/Emergency supplies (including personal hygiene products)  Direct counseling services via our school based support team and community based organization mental health services liaisons  Encourage parents to enroll their families at the Montefiore Health Clinic located in the building  Weekly outreach to STH students and families  Home visits by a family assistant to engage and check in on families  Team will liaise with Borough STH content specialists for additional guidance as needed Additionally the team will continually review the living situations of all of our students and identify any students falling into the STH category to ensure they all receive needed services and support. Each student will receive the newly updated McKinney Vento residency questionnaire at the beginning of each term. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). NA 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 1  NA 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. NA 2  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. Teachers are recruited from the various organizations below that have vetted their credentials to ensure they are HQT: ● New York City Department of Education New Teacher Finder ● Local colleges and universities ● Partnership with Lehman College’s student teacher program Teachers are provided with mentoring according to the requirements of the NYCDOE. Additionally, new teachers are paired with more experienced teachers who provide support. Subject-area supervisors provide support and guidance for new teachers to ensure that they adjust well to teaching. All teachers engage in our school’s weekly professional learning sessions. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). Professional Learning (PL) is a continuous strategic process, at the High School for Teaching and the Professions, to provide opportunities for our school community to come together to highly engage in supports that improve teacher practice resulting in improved outcomes for student achievement and social development. The underpinnings for our school-wide focus for PL opportunities derive from an extensive analysis of student data, collaborative refinement of our school’s Instructional Focus, analysis of our Advance data, and collaborative work with our school’s professional learning committee. 3  We are committed to becoming an active laboratory for implementing, reflecting upon and refining practices leading to student success and professional growth for all faculty members. Our reflective and collaborative structure will further guide the teaching and learning work at T&P. Our core values supporting our Professional Learning Plan will ground the work and all supported by research: ● A focus on student learning needs as informed by classroom, school and system data; ● Improvement of educational practice through self-assessment, feedback, and analysis of authentic educator and student work; ● Reflective collegial dialogue that offers teams of educators opportunities to positively challenge their thinking as well as new perspectives in their practice; and ● A commitment to on-going work, implementing new learning, and documenting educator and student growth. Our professional learning plan will serve as a lever to support our school in meeting our Comprehensive Education Plan (CEP) goals and our instructional priorities. Our PL plan is in a cycle of continuous refinement–gathering and analyzing data, and identifying weaknesses and areas of concern. Our systems and structures for this refinement foster a culture of customized professional learning opportunities for our faculty and staff members. Furthermore, a development of shared and coherent strategies will enable us to address specific concerns, supporting each other, and gathering new data and information to assess the impact of our work to improve student outcomes and teacher effectiveness. As a school community, we have come together to prioritize and strategically craft our school’s instructional focus. This instructional focus will anchor our work toward meeting our goals; inform school wide and targeted professional development plans; support observation and feedback cycles; and support the communication of our academic expectations with families. School-Wide PL Focus Our school-wide focus for professional learning is developed taking into account all of the aforementioned. The goal is to design and implement a plan that is effective in advancing gains in student achievement, purposeful and applicable and ultimately guided by data analysis, teacher input and choice. To this end, we analyzed data from two school-wide activities: 1. Advance Data for the 2017-2018 school year. In addition to the teacher evaluation expectations outlined by the NYC DOE. 2. Feedback from teachers leaders to support school-wide focus for our PL plan. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources 4  Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. NA 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). NA Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). NA 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. Our school community has been selected as a PROSE school for the upcoming school year. As a PROSE school we have embraced shared decision-making consisting of representative stakeholders in the school, such as teachers, parents, support personnel, and administrators. Distributive leadership spreads decision-making authority throughout the school. Unlike traditional, principal-dominated school leadership models, distributive leadership provides us with opportunities for everyone—including teachers, students, parents and community members—to participate in key decisions. There are many advantages to this type of organization. It fosters community engagement, provides opportunities for professional and personal growth, and enables sustained progress despite inevitable changes in leadership over time. Teachers and administrators meet regularly to develop a clear picture of what achievement we intend to measure. We begin with clear statements of the intended learning—clear and understandable to everyone, including students—so that we end up with sound assessments, expectations and supports for everyone. To facilitate this work I meet weekly with an instructional cabinet team that includes teachers from each department. In addition, I meet with grade teams of teachers twice a month to engage them in feedback opportunities. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools 5 Title I Part A (Basic) Federal 405,605.00 Title II, Part A Federal 0 Title III, Part A Federal Title III, Immigrant Federal Tax Levy (FSF) Local 12,366.00 0 3,734,193.00 X NA X NA X Column B Section Reference(s) Sections: 5a, 5b, 5c, and 5d NA Sections: 5a, 5b, and 5c NA Sections: 5a, 5b, 5c, 5d, and 5e Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages: 6   Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 7  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. High School for Teaching and the Professions, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students High School for Teaching and the Professions will support parents and families of Title I students by: ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; 8  ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; 9  ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents’ can understand. 0 School-Parent Compact (SPC)  High School for Teaching and the Professions, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; 1  ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; 2  ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; 3  ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 4  Addendum: Community School Partnerships Directions: The Community School (CS) strategy is directly aligned to the Framework for Great Schools. Community Schools bring schools and community partners together and integrate academics, health, youth development, and family engagement to provide students with the tools and opportunities they need to succeed. The Core Services in Community Schools are Expanded Learning Time (ELT), Attendance Supports, Family Engagement, and Health & Wellness. Part 1 – Community School Partnerships Goal(s) How is the CS strategy integrated into academic instruction at your school, and what impact has it had on student academic outcomes? CS hired Success Mentors to be grade advisors to at risk cohorts of students . Success mentors will monitor students’ grades, attendance, facilitate family engagement and will advance yearly with their students. Success Mentors will also assist with our AIS program by meeting with students and ensuring that they attend AIS (Academic In-Semester Support) as needed. During the 2017-18 school year, 82.5% of our 11th graders earned 10 or more credits. In addition, our graduation rate for the 2017-2018 school year was 77% with an anticipated 80% rate for August 2018. Indicate the summative goal(s) of the Community School for the 2018-19 school year. Be sure to construct the goal to be SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Realistic, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 100% of our 9th grade students will be engaged in peer to peer mentoring. By June 2019, 100% of our 9th and 10th graders will be engaged in AVID instructional strategies. By June 2019, we will increase our parent engagement through targeted professional learning opportunities as measured by a 5% increase in parent PL opportunities. By June 201 there will be a 3% increase in our overall attendance rate. Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Community School Annual Goal(s): How will achieving your Community School Goal(s)--in Expanded Learning Time (ELT), Attendance Supports, Family Engagement, and Health & Wellness--support your academic goals for students? Community school goals are aligned with academic outcomes for students. Part 2 – Community School Partnerships Core Services Action Plan Part 2a. Identify the Community-based Organization (CBO) partnerships that you will develop in ELT, Attendance Supports, Family Engagement, and Health & Wellness, their target student population(s), and scope of the services provided. As well as supporting schools’ supportive environment and attendance work, CBOs should be helping to support your school’s instructional focus. CBO Partnership PGC Mentoring AVID Target Population 9th Grade Students Scope of Service Peer to peer tutoring 9th and targeted 10th Grade Students WICOR strategies and college and career readiness SY18-19 SMART Goal See above goals See above goals 5  Parent Programs All families Attendance Improvement All students Part 3 – Budget and Resource Alignment Professional learning and workshops for families Attendance Improvement See above goals See above goals Part 3a. Indicate resources your Community Partnership will leverage to achieve your summative SMART goal(s) and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Community school funds will supplement other school budget funds. Part 3b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) X Title I SWP Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century C4E School Achievement X Other Funding Part 3c. Describe how the school will partner with the Lead CBO to do the following: 1. Community Schools are expected to partner with a community-based partner organization (CBO) and together with members of the School Leadership Team, hire a Community School Director. The Director will lead implementation of the asset and needs assessment process, and other critically important coordinating activities. Indicate how you will leverage this aspect of the work. Community Schools are expected to personalize the needs of all students, through strategic programming and services, as determined by the asset and needs assessment, and must also offer Expanded Learning Time (ELT) and mental health programming. In completing this section, ensure that you think about how: (1) the right services are provided to the right students and families at the right time; and (2) how you will seamlessly coordinate services with instructional programming happening throughout and outside of the school day. Indicate how you will implement this work, and describe other programming you anticipate to be in place to strengthen this initiative. Community Schools are expected to emerge as Partnership Schools, which are places where parents and families feel welcome, actively participate in the conversation and decision-making around the renewal of their schools, and have many opportunities to advocate for their children. Monthly meetings and Community School Forums engaging families and community stakeholders will be a critical part of this family engagement strategy. Describe how you will implement this aspect of the work. Community School Principals are expected to meet on a weekly basis with their Community School Director, select Assistant Principals, key staff, and other CBOs, to analyze trends in data and case manage individual students. Data tools – including the New Visions Data Sorter - and training will be available for schools to use. Indicate how you will implement this aspect of the work. 2. 3. 4. Our community school team is embedded into all aspects of our academic and social and emotional planning for our students and families. 6  Part 4 – Community School Partnerships Oversight Part 4a. Key Staff and Partners 1. Name and describe the scope of involvement of all community partners working in the school (include partners supporting ELT, counseling, enrichment, etc.) 2. Name the members of your Community School Team and how meetings will be organized and structured to engage all stakeholders and be focused on results. 3. Explain data strategies including the use of the data sorter, and steps that the school will take to ensure that the appropriate interventions are provided to the right students Community School Team Members Name Title or Role Parent Coordinator Cynthia Robinson PTA President Nancy Rodriguez Robert Hernandez Principal Lynnette Bermudez Community School Director Kamele M. Mclaren Assistant Principal Seth Gilman Nathaly Nunez Part 4b. Indicate resources needed including human resources, instructional resources, and schedule adjustments to implement the Community School program. Community School funding and school funding along with additional grants will support our CS work. Teacher Student Part 4c. Timeline for implementation and completion, including start and end dates. July 2018 to June 2019 Part 4d. Mental Health Work Plan Separate from this S/CEP, schools will complete a Mental Health Work Plan that will become an addendum to this document. 7  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 8  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: RATIONALE: The High School for Teaching and the Professions has an ESL program that currently serves 118 students. This program is comprised of both stand alone classes and co-teaching support during the day. There is ESL tutoring after school and Saturdays. The intent of both programs is to support all English Language Learners to make advancement in language acquisition as well as developing the needed academic language to thrive in the classroom environment. The program is to give students the necessary support in reading, writing, speaking, and listening skills to prepare the students for the NYSESLAT, Regents exams, and promote college and career readiness. Subgroups & Grade Levels of Students to be served: Entering and Emerging level students receive three periods per day of ESL support. Transitioning level students receive two periods of ESL support per day. Expanding level students receive services in the form of our co-teaching model in their English Language Arts and Social Studies classes. Student placement in the ESL program is based on the results of the NYSESLAT and NYSITELL exams. Data from ATS is regularly reviewed in order to identify students requiring ESL services. In addition, all core subject area teachers meet weekly in departments and with school leaders to analyze data and student work on a variety of assessments, including the NYC Performance Assessments, Regents exams, and teacher-created, Common Core-aligned assessments. Based on this analysis of data, teacher teams and school leaders identify instructional adjustments and recommend students for additional support services as needed.The ESL program is designed to facilitate language acquisition for our English language learners at an accelerated pace. The curriculum uses a variety of texts, including materials from the Collections Curriculum, teacher-created materials aligned with the New York State Engage curriculum,and the Common Core Standards for Literacy. Schedule & Duration The Title III allocation will be used to support the implementation of ESL Saturday Academy and After School programs. Students will be assigned to this programs based on ELL status, targeting entering/ emerging English language learners as well as students identified through the inquiry process as needing additional support. Participating students will attend Saturday Academy sessions 25 times per year, receiving three hours each week of direct instruction, from 9:00 AM to 12:00 PM. These sessions are facilitated by both ESL and content teachers and focus on the development of English language skills across content areas. There will be up to five teachers, with at least one certified in each of the content areas covered, including math, English, Social Studies, Science, and ESL. Teachers work with students on building reading, writing, speaking, and listening skills that will increase achievement on Common Core-aligned assessments and build college and career readiness. 9  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information There will be 16 one-hour sessions in the months immediately preceding the administration of Regents exams (8 sessions in January and 8 sessions in May/June). These sessions will be facilitated by content-area teachers and will be geared toward specific subject areas. There will be up to five teachers participating, with at least one certified in each of the content areas covered, including math, English, social studies, the sciences, and ESL. After school sessions run from 2:35pm to 4:00pm, and are open to up to 75 students. Attendance is taken daily. They are filed with the Assistant Principal. Phone calls are made to the parents to inform them that their child is strongly recommended to attend this program to further their language acquisition. The guidance counselor follows up and documents the parent outreach. The outreach is done in the parents preferred language using the resources we have at the school or using the Translation unit with the DOE. Language & Instruction/ Types of Materials The primary language of instruction will be English. The students will have the aide of their teachers that speak another language (Spanish and Albanian). There are glossaries available in their native language to aide them during their classes during the regular school day and at the after school programs. Students will also have the opportunity to supplement their learning during the day by using online activities through Castle Learning, for Regents preparation. There are Regents materials and readings that are used to help the students with literacy and content material. Another computer program that is used is Achieve3000 to support literacy skills. Achieve 3000 allows for full native language support or partial native language support (in select languages). Another program that will be directed to the Entering and Emerging students after school is System 44, which will solidify the foundation of language by reinforcing the alphabet, sounds, blends, and phonics. Anticipated attendance is 75 students, with a teacher to student ratio of 1:15. Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: RATIONALE:All teachers participating in the Title III program receive professional development in strategies to support English language learners, with a focus on providing scaffolds and adjusting instruction to address language needs and promote reading, writing, speaking, and listening skills. These sessions take place on a weekly basis throughout the year. TEACHERS TO RECEIVE TRAINING: The 3 ESL teachers will be the primary ones to receive training off site. Then they will turn key the information to the other 2 teachers who are ESL certified in their content areas. <!--{cke_protected}{C}%3C!%2D%2D%3Fxml%3Anamespace%20prefix%20%3D%20o%20ns%20%3D%20%22urn%3Aschemas-microsoft-com%3Aoffice%3Aoffice%22%20%2F%2D%2D%3E--><!--{cke_protected}{C}%3C!%2D%2D%3Fxml%3Anamespace%20prefix%20%3D%20o%20%2F%2D%2D%3E--> 0  Part C: Professional Development TOPICS TO BE COVERED:One aspect will be showing teachers how to incorporate technology based programs to supplement the instruction in the classroom environment by using System 44. System 44 will build a foundation of language- phonics, learning vocabulary with visuals, explicit academic vocabulary and language instruction. Achieve 3000 to build reading comprehension of academic and informational texts The computer programs and the outside PD will be at cost to the program.With in the extended day/Professional Development days of the week will include:- Scaffolding Reading of Complex Texts for English Language Learners- Building Academic Vocabulary- Engaging and Supporting English Language Learners in Classroom Discussion- Using Student Self-Assessment and Rubrics- Planning Lessons that Integrate Universal Design for Learning Principles- Supporting English Language Learners in Meeting Common Core Standards in Literacy- Using Castle Learning to Support Regents Readiness- Using Student Data to Inform Instructional Adjustments that Address the Needs of English Language Learners SCHEDULE & DURATION: Bilingual Program for Special Education Students - September 19th & October 17th - 8:30am-12:30pm System 44 PD - TBD AVID High Engagement Strategies for ELLs- TBD AVID Literacy Buildinging - TBD NAME OF PROVIDER:Most of our Professional development is facilitated by the administrative team and instructional lead teachers within the school. Many of our in house Professional Development is a lead teacher that turn keys best teaching practices and/or new strategies teachers can infuse in their lessons. We also utilize the ELL borough support specialist, and a coach from Achieve3000, Nando Prudhomme that assist in targeting the needs of the ELL students and scaffolding techniques to adjust the delivery of instruction. We also have weekly 48-minute professional development sessions that take place during the regularly scheduled professional periods and teachers work with a facilitator in small groups, determined by department, as well as areas of need identified through analysis of observation data. There are attendance sheets and agendas for the professional development activities that are filed with the administration. This will have a positive impact on the ELLs in our school because our staff will have a variety of strategies to deliver their instruction that is accessible to the ELLs. These scaffolds will create the bridges the students need to demonstrate their knowledge while learning a new language. 1  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: RATIONALE:<!--{cke_protected}{C}%3C!%2D%2D%3Fxml%3Anamespace%20prefix%20%3D%20o%20ns%20%3D%20%22urn%3Aschemas-microsoft-com%3Aoffice%3Aoffice%22%20%2F%2D%2D%3E--><!--{cke_protected}{C}%3C!%2D%2D%3Fxml%3Anamespace%20prefix%20%3D%20o%20%2F%2D%2D%3E--> Parent engagement activities are created to strengthen the relationships between the families and the T&P staff. This will help to reinforce common goals and fortify skills that are needed to prepare all the ELLs toward career and college readiness. The events listed below are at cost to the program. SCHEDULE & DURATION:June-August - We schedule time with the incoming freshman parents to sit with the assistant principal (Ms. DeBellis), the guidance counselor (Mr. Ruiz), and Ms. Lighty (ESL Coordinator), and Ms. Rodriguez (parent coordinator) to explain the academic supports for English Language Learners. September/October we have ELL parent meetings. The meeting covers the academic expectations for the students and the major events for each grade that academic year. In the Fall we organize a parent meet and greet where the administration and ELL teachers encourage the families and let them know the support they have at our school. We have a guest speaker to emphasise the importance of getting an education and creating an environment where we all can support their children reach their highest potential. Weekly Adult ESL classes are held from November to May. Mr. Rodriguez (ESL teacher) assists the parents to develop their English skills so they can help their children to develop fluency in the English language. Monthly parent association meetings are held. In these meetings there are also workshops, facilitated by the parent coordinator, Nancy Rodriguez, in collaboration with the principal and assistant principals. Parental activities related to Title III include providing materials and training to help parents improve their children's academic achievement, and information on how to use technology (e.g. Pupil Path) to foster parent engagement and communication. We are developing a school website that will inform the parents of upcoming events, the accessibility to contact our teachers, and some of the community building events that take place with the families. The school uses an online grading and data system (Skedula) that keeps the students and parents up to date with the students' progress and academic performance. Parents are informed about upcoming events and workshops by the parent coordinator, and are regularly contacted by guidance counselors and teachers to discuss student achievement and progress. When necessary, the school's bilingual counselor, parent coordinator, secretaries, and school aides assist in scheduling and facilitating meetings. When needed, we use the over the phone Interpretation Services to communicate to parents in their language of choice. All parent workshops are conducted in mostly English and Spanish. All materials sent to parents are provided in their native languages. 2 Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. na Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits) na  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL na na na na na na na na na na na na 3  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 10 School Name HS for Teaching and the Professions Borough Bronx School Number 433 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Roberto Hernandez Coach type here ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Lesley Lighty Teacher/Subject Area Minoska Romero/History Teacher/Subject Area type here Related-Service Provider Robbin Bongiorno Superintendent Carron Staple Assistant Principal Alvin Simpson Coach type here School Counselor Jessica Madera Parent Jacqueline Marrero Parent Coordinator Nancy Rodriguez Field Support Center Staff Member Anita Bushi Other (Name and Title) type here C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 3 1 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 6 2 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics 4  Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 433 Total number of ELLs 109 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 25.17% Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 0 1 2 4 3 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? 1. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? The interventions and scaffolds are embedded into the curriculum. The ENL teachers meet and plan with their co-teachers to determine the needs of the ELLs and to select the appropriate learning strategies for the ELLs. The ENL teachers also meet as an inquiry team to analyze assessment data of the ELLs and to plan next steps to assist the struggling areas. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? 5  The success of our ENL program is measured by student progress on the NYSESLAT examination, the ultimate goal is for the students to test a level of proficient. However, we closely look at the growth each student makes when they move from one proficiency level to the next. We had 12 students attain proficiency on the NYSESLAT. Additionally, students are assessed throughout the year using alternative forms of assessments. Computer programs such as Achieve 3000 which is used to assess language development. System 44 is also used for Entering and Emerging level students to teach phonetic awareness, scaffolded reading and speaking opportunities. There are teacher-generated formative and summative assessments to provide data throughout the year and allow us to benchmark the progress of our ESL program. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? The ENL teachers and their co-teachers review data and discuss their findings with the department. The data is used to identify students as risk and therefore are provided extra support through in class invention, after school tutoring and Saturday tutoring. In addition, we also look at creating classes focused on the needs of the ELLs, such as an additional Math lab for students that did not pass the Algebra Regents- to reinforce skills and strategies being taught in their Math class. We also have a writing class for ELLs, to assist them develop stronger writing skills to prepare them for the History Regents. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] Paste response to question here: 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. The above data shows we have 109 ELLs (including 12 that have tested Commanding). 1 out of the 12 students that tested out were able to accomplish this by means of the new provision of scoring Expanding on the NYSESLAT + passing the ELA Regents exam with a 65 or higher. We have 81 ELLs that are entitled. Most of our ELLs are categorized as transitioning or expanding. The largest percentage of ELLs are currently in the 10th grad- 38%. The number of ELLs decreases annually. Students are programmed for their requisite classes, and they receive the necessary support and scaffolding that has been formulated by the ENL certified instructors. The NYSESLAT is used to see the progression of language acquisition. The latest NYSESLAT results revealed that ____ of our ELLs tested Proficient. The data is also used to monitor the students who are progressing from one level to the next. The 2016 NYSESLAT data shows that ___% of our students increased a level of English comprehension. About ___ of our students scored the same score as the previous year. Out of that 60% there is 25% that scored “Expanding/Advanced” for the past two years. This shows that there is a core group that we can focus on to move them to the Commanding level. This also is shows that there are many students that have not advanced to the next level and we can target their needs to show growth. The NYSITELL results of new admits within the past 2016-2017 year reveal that 3 out of the 11 students tested are Entering/Emerging level students. This demonstrates the need to revise our existing curriculum for Entering ELLs and to develop a strong foundation for phonics and literacy skills. 2 out the 11 students tested Expanding. We monitor these students closely to evaluate their adjustment to the reading and writing expectations at the high school level. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? The ENL coordinator and ENL teacher meets with the Assistant Principal to discuss the courses needed for each cohort, the mandated ENL services for each ELL and the projected Regents exams that the student needs. These are ongoing meetings but are frequently reviewed at the beginning of each semester as well as toward the end of the year. The meetings also include our schools counselor, who has all the ELLs in her caseload to monitor. The ENL coordinator and Assistant Principal meet weekly to discuss academic concerns and challenges that ELLs are encountering. This is then discussed with the principal, school counselor and ENL team to create a plan to address the possible adjustments to the courses and programs of the ELLs. Part IV: ELL Programming 6  Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. Our school offers a combination of co-teaching and stand alone ENL classes. All Entering, Emerging, and Transitioning ELL students receive at least one period of ENL co-teaching in a content area class as well as one period of a scheduled standalone ENL class. Transitioning, Expanding and Commanding ELLs receive ENL through a co-taught content area class. In terms of program models, students travel within their same grades for co-taught content area classes and grouped heterogeneously within the standalone ESL classes. b. TBE program. If applicable. N/A c. DL program. If applicable. N/A 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? ENL is delivered through the co-teaching model our school has. ENL support is a large component in the Math, History and English departments. The 9th and 10th grade students are blocked and programmed together. The ELLs who are Entering receive a stand alone ENL class in addition to ENL support in their Math, History and English classes. The English Language Arts classes will include a co-teacher. Although we have a free standing ENL program, we also provide Home Language Arts for the Spanish speaking students who have strong literacy skills in their native language. This way they can continue to strengthen their literacy in their native language and transition those skills in English. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. Content area instruction is delivered primarily in English. ELLs are programmed with general education students for these classes. Every attempt is made to program these students into ICT classes for each content area to ensure that they receive the appropriate support. When available, content and ENL teachers can provide the students with native-language support. In addition, teachers provide student with native-language texts to supplement and support the English texts. Teachers give special attention to academic vocabulary and implement other strategies, such as the use of visuals, graphic organizers, and cooperative learning to provide multiple entry points for the ELLs in their classes and support language acquisition. Entering and Emerging students are programmed together for some content classes to receive instruction in English but also have and ENL co-teacher who also speaks their native language. Newly enrolled ELL students receive an array of academic and support services. We offer tutoring services during their lunch period as well as after school. We offer Regents and SAT prep classes, mandated tutorials in core content areas, Saturday Academy enrichment programs, and a myriad of extra-curricular clubs and sports activities. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? ELL students receive evaluation in their native language when possible by a certified pedagogue. A large percentage of our incoming students are Spanish speaking. The certified Spanish teacher and other teachers with bilingual extensions evaluate the students in their native language for fluency and placement. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? a. SIFE 7  b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status ELL subgroups receive differentiated instruction though content areas where QTEL scaffolding strategies are implemented: a. SIFE students receive a period of Native Language instruction in addition to ENL. They are also encouraged to participate in our tutoring program designed to support them in their content-area classes. b. Newcomer ELLs receive 540 minutes of ELL instruction weekly. They are engaged in a challenging theme-based curriculum which focuses on vocabulary development, phonics, phonemic awareness, close-reading strategies and academic concepts. Also, the culture, native language and life experiences of the students are embedded throughout instruction. These activities are set up to build students’ academic English proficiency through scaffolded instruction. Classroom discourse is arranged in a manner to promote and develop language acquisition and academic concepts. c. ELLs who have received services from 4 to 6 years receive similar instruction as newcomers; however, the work is more rigorous and fewer scaffolds are used. They receive services according to their ENL proficiency level as per the CR Part 154 regulations. Higher expectations are placed on these students to ensure their transition to general education classes without ENL services. Students are engaged in reading and writing activities more closely aligned to their grade-level counterparts, with close attention to the acquisition of Tier II academic language. Tutoring is available to these students to receive additional help with their content-area classes. d. Long-term ELL instruction differs slightly from that of four to six year ELLs. While still rigorous, the program focuses on the students’ acquisition of academic language, phonemic awareness, reading and writing strategies, and organization skills. Tutoring is available to these students to receive additional help with their content-area classes. e. Former-ELLs are placed into ICT ELA and content-area classes for continued support. Teachers are made aware of the former-ELL population and accommodations. All ELLs and former ELLs up to 2 years after exiting ELL status must receive a minimum number of units of integrated ENL. For at least two years following the school year in which a student “tested out” from ELL status, former ELLs receive at least one half of one unit of study of English as a new language (90 minutes per week) and are eligible for certain specified testing accommodations, in addition to any accommodations on their IEPs or 504 Plans, if applicable. Those testing accommodations are time extension (all exams), separate location (all exams), third reading of listening selection (English Language Arts exams only), bilingual dictionaries and/or glossaries: ELLs may use bilingual glossaries when taking State examinations in all subjects except LOTE, Schools may provide ELL students with an oral translation of a state examination when there is no translated edition provided by SED, ELL students can make use of alternative language editions or of oral translations of state examinations and write their responses to the open-ended question in their home languages (with the exception of doing this on the NYS ELA/Common Core exam). 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? ELL-SWDs are programmed according to their proficiency levels. In addition to receiving instruction that is aligned with their proficiency levels, lessons are often differentiated to address the acquisition on academic language, phonemic awareness, reading and writing strategies, and organization skills. Further differentiation is provided to match the goals on these students’ individualized educational plans. Additionally, modifications are provided as required by each student’s IEP. A bilingual paraprofessional is available to special education students as an alternative placement. A variety of instructional materials are used to support ELL-SWDs. Technology is utilized with all ELL classes through the use of SMART boards and laptop carts. In addition, the students use language and literacy software, such as Achieve 3000, System 44 and Math for All. To support ELLs in the content areas, language frames, bilingual dictionaries and native language glossaries are made available. When available, books on CD or textbooks in the native language are provided. 8  7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? All ELL-SWDs are programmed for ICT content-area classes, with some of the teachers dual-certified in Special Education and ESL. In additioin, some of the ICT teachers are bilingual. The use of ICT allows for differentiation to be provided that matches the goals on these students’ individualized educational plans and for modifications to be provided as required by each student’s IEP. A bilingual paraprofessional is available to special education students as an alternative placement. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? Looking at the 10th graders that passed the Global History Regents in January versus June, we then were able to offer them Economics and Participation in Government courses, which would put them ahead in accumulating their history credit requirements for graduation. For those students that did not pass the Global History class, a writing class was created to strengthen their writing skills which were weak for the essay portion of the exam. In the 9th grade we created a Math lab to supplement the main Math class they were taking to strengthen their skills and be better prepared to take the Math Regents in June, which was taught by an ENL teacher and Math teacher. For ENL students that are on track for graduation and passed all their Regents, we also offer AP courses in English and in US History to make them college ready. We also provide additional Math and Science courses to prepare them for other Regents exams, for those who have the goal to graduate with an Advanced Regents diploma. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? N/A 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. All ELL students are included in all academic programs- including Advanced Placement programs, clubs, sports teams and trips at our school. Our 12th grade ELLs participate as mentor for underclassmen through the PGC program, to build a stronger school community. Some of the clubs the students are invited to participate in are School Counsel, Photography Club, Chess Club, Book Club, Girl Talk Club, as well as internal and external internship programs. Supplemental services offered to ELLs include standalone ENL and native language arts classes, Saturday Academy and AIS classes designed specifically for ELLs, and individualized support from the guidance counselor who works with ELLs. We also have workshops scheduled for families of ELLs to inform them about ESL requirements and help them in making the best instructional decisions for their children. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. Instructional materials used are bilingual glossaries, academic materials in their native language, and literacy libraries which accommodate their comprehension throughout the core curricula. Technology used to support ELLs include interactive Smart Boards and laptop computers. The students use Achieve 3000 to accelerate literacy and language acquisition through targeted instruction in the classroom. The student receives differentiated, grade-appropriate, nonfiction passages, matched to his individual Lexile level. Through ongoing assessments, their reading abilities are evaluated, and text rigor is increased when progress is detected. The students learn through exploring a variety of topics, genres, develop vocabulary and comprehension through word analysis. The Entering level ELLs use the computer program System 44. This is an intensive program that targets phonics, decoding, reading and writing. The program collects student responses and adapts instruction to meet every student's needs. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? 9  Native language development is a paramount concern for students labeled as SIFE; when possible, these students are programmed for 225 minutes of weekly instruction in their native language in order to facilitate skill development. This curriculum is aligned with Common Core Standards and with the ENL and ELA classes in order to ensure comprehension, vocabulary acquisition, and foundational writing skills. Currently, there are two licensed Spanish language instructors on faculty, one of whom teaches a native language arts class. Spanish is the only language elective currently offered at the High School for Teaching and the Professions. Native language instruction is critical in the overall development of students’ second language skills. Students are encouraged to utilize first language skills to further their development and understanding in acquiring their second language. Students that speak languages other than Spanish are given materials in their native language and used to assess their fluency in reading and writing. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. All students at the High School for Teaching and the Professions are enrolled in grades 9-12. Like all students, English language learners are placed into graduation cohorts based on the first time they entered high school (or the equivalent). A student’s cohort year is fixed, and represents the 9th grade school year. There are special circumstances after the ESL Coordinator,Guidance Counselor and Administration meet, that an ELL can be placed in a cohort other than his or her actual high school entry year. Students are grouped heterogeneously across grade levels in standalone ESL classes. In ELA and other content-area classes, instruction is tailored to support all students in meeting the expectations of the Common Core standards for the appropriate grade level. Additional support targeted to specific grade levels is provided through meetings with the guidance counselor and small-group AIS instruction. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? In our co-location we have related services personnel that schedule their time to work with each school in our building to ensure that the mandated services of each student is met. We also have a Montefiore medical clinic in our building that is available to all the students, after submitting the necessary documents, which allows them access to medical services as well as socio-emotional services with staff that are bilingual. They have introduced themselves to our staff and made their services available to us. We also have campus sports teams, where the coaches work with all the schools to include all students in the school athletic teams. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). Newly enrolled English Language Learners are offered a one-week summer bridge program during the summer preceding their freshman year of high school. The summer bridge program provides enrichment activities in English, and Mathematics. The students also participate on trips to different educational sites. This provides an opportunity for students to become acclimated to the high school setting prior to the school year beginning. Staff involved in the summer bridge program include the Parent Coordinator, ENL Coordinator, School Counselor, and Community School Director. In our schools' effort to promote literacy, the students also receive a summer reading list with a writing assignment that is collected in September. The school counselor and parent coordinator also plan workshops for the students and parents regarding graduation requirements, how to use pupil path for monitoring academic progress and establish electronic communication. In addition there are school spirit activities that the school plans through out the year. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? Currently, Spanish is the only language offered other than English at the High School for Teaching and the Professions. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? 0  d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? We do not currently have a dual language program at the High School for Teaching and the Professions Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? All ELL personnel at our school receive professional development in strategies to support English language learners, with a focus on providing scaffolds and adjusting instruction to address language needs and promote reading, writing, speaking, and listening skills. These sessions take place on a weekly basis throughout the year and include the following topics: - Scaffolding Reading of Complex Texts for English Language Learners - Building Academic Vocabulary - Engaging and Supporting English Language Learners in Classroom Discussion - Using Student Self-Assessment and Rubrics - Planning Lessons that Integrate Universal Design for Learning Principles - Supporting English Language Learners in Meeting Common Core Standards in Literacy - Designing Lessons Implementing Achieve3000 - Using System 44 - Math for All for Regents Readiness - Using Student Data to Inform Instructional Adjustments that Address the Needs of English Language Learners Professional development is facilitated by the administrative team, instructional lead teachers, and a consultant from Teachers College, and other ESL specialists from the DOE. Professional learning sessions take place on Mondays after school, as well as during daily common planning time. Teachers work with facilitators in small groups, determined by department, as well as areas of need identified through analysis of observation data. All teachers engage in professional learning around the needs of studens in meeting the expectations of the Common Core Learning Standards. ESL teachers receive targeted professional development in integrating Common Core Standards into ESL instruction. ESL teachers also attend professional learning and common planning sessions in which teachers deepen their understanding of Common Core aligned-curricula (including EngageNY modules for math and the Connections ELA curriculum) and plan lessons to meet the needs of their students. ESL teachers meet weekly as an inquiry team, engaging in a protocol that assesses student learning against targeted Common Core standards and identifies instructional adjustments to support individual and groups of students in meeting the expectations of the standards. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. To assist ELLs as they transition from middle to high school, we provide staff with professional development to help them analyze the NYSESLAT scores and the State ELA and mathematics assessments to determine how to best address the needs of these incoming students. In addition, in content are teams, the staff will compare and contrast the reading and writing demands between middle school and high school, and what instruction will best bridge the gap for our ELLs. For the minimum hours of ELL training, all staff is provided with professional learning opportunities that deepen their understanding of the NYSESLAT exam, ESL proficiency levels, and specific strategies to support needs of ELLs in their classrooms. We also collaborate with the Borough Field Support to provide workshops for our teachers that teach our ELL 1  population. Since our ELLs receive content-area instruction in general education classes, the staff is presented with best practices for ELLs in their content areas that include methods for fair assessment, as well as strategies and scaffolds that can be implemented in content-area classes. Select staff are sent to specific workshops and trained on how to score the NYSESLAT exams. Based on the new mandate in the amended CR Part 154.2 we must provide professional development to all teachers and administrators that specifically address the needs of English language learners. A minimum of fifteen percent (15%) of the required professional development hours for all teachers prescribed by CR Part 80 must be dedicated to language acquisition, including a focus on best practices for co-teaching strategies and integrating language and content instruction for English language learners. For all bilingual and ENL teachers, a minimum of fifty percent (50%) of the required professional development hours must be dedicated to language acquisition. Teachers’ PD activities include Achieve 3000 workshops, System 44, SIOP training to implement learning strategies in the content classes, QTEL workshops and any digital ELL Webinar courses that are available throughout the year. Agendas are provided for teachers for all sessions and attendance is taken; all records are kept on file by the administrative team. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? In addition to scheduled parent-teacher conferences and the mandated parent orientation meetings with the intake team, parents of ELLs meet individually with the Parent Coordinator, ESL Coordinator, and Guidance Counselor and, as needed, ESL and content area teachers. These meetings address the ongoing needs of students as measured against their language proficiency assessment results and language development needs across content areas. The Parent Coordinator, ESL Coordinator, Guidance Counselor, and many teachers are bilingual in English and Spanish and can communicate and translate as needed. For parents who speak languages other than English or Spanish, translations are provided as needed. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. The ELL community is a focus from the time parents are visting our high school during Open House night, when the middle school students are deciding which high schools to apply for. We inform them of the ENL services availble for their child in addition to supplemental support. Parents are warmly invited for an open house in September to familairize themselves with the staff, the culture of the school and the programs the school offers. We have special workshops for the parents of our Senior class to review any Financial Aide questions and completing the Financial Aide application. During the Thanksgiving holiday we have a potluck for the students and families. One of our ENL teacher also teaches an adult ENL classes for the parents every Thursday evening. The parent coordinator works closely with the bilingual Guidance Counselor to reach out to all the ELL families with phone calls and written correspondence regarding events they are invited to. In the Spring the school has a ELL dinner with a guest speaker to encourage parental invovlement. Parents are invited to be a part of the School Leadership Team, Principal Round Table Meetings, Open School events, Parental Workshops, access Community Based Organizations, as well as the Parent Association. Monthly meetings and additional workshops are held throughout the school year. The parents are invited to chaperone the trips that their children are invited to. In the instances where we need to communicate with parents and we do not have the immediate resources on hand, we contact the translation services provided through the DOE. 2  Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Our ESL program has changed as a result of the needs of our student population. The student populations' needs have been reflected in the evolving ESL program. The incorporation of a push-in model into the High School for Teaching and the Professions has proven to be successful during the first three months of the school year. ELLs have responded positively to the new structure of the ESL program. 3 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Roberto Hernandez, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 4  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: School DBN: Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Roberto Hernandez Title Principal Kamele McLaren Assistant Principal Nancy Rodriguez Parent Coordinator Lesley Lighty ENL/Bilingual Teacher Jacqueline Marrero Parent Minoska Romero/History Teacher/Subject Area Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach Jessica Madera School Counselor Elaine Lindsay Mark Weisman Robbin Bongiorno Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Related-Services Provider Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 5  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 10X433 School Name: HS for Teaching and the Professions Superintendent: Elaine Lindsay The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No (*Primary) * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. During the intake process, the parent coordinator, ESL coordinator, and guidance counselor meet with all parents. The HLIS is administered and parents are also interviewed about their language preferences. Parents are also all expected to complete Student Emergency Contact cards that note preferred languages of communication. Emergency contact cards and HLIS are kept on file and are accessible to staff members. In addition, the Parent Coordinator and the guidance team conduct regular surveys throughout the year to collect feedback and assess parents' ongoing needs. These surveys are administered in person during parent workshops and online through our Google platform. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. 6 Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Language Most parents' preferred language is either English or Spanish, with a few parents indicating Thai, Albanian, and Vietnamese. 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. Every year, our school disseminates and provides translations of letters from school leadership and teachers, overviews of curricula, parent-teacher conference announcements, information on AIS services, after-school programs, and Saturday Academy, information on parent workshops, information on Community School events, New York State testing dates, parent newsletters, and all necessary calendars. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. 7  Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide interpretation service(s)? Throughout the school year, we have three formal parent-teacher conferences that are scheduled according to DOE guidelines, in the fall, winter, and spring. The Parent Coordinator facilitates monthly meetings for parents on specific topics determined through review of parent surveys and assessment of student data.Teachers schedule meetings and reach out to parents via email and phone on a weekly basis during designated parent engagement time on Tuesday afternoons. The guidance and attendance teams, as well as teachers, have regular informal interactions through phone calls, emails, and face-to-face meetings on an as-needed basis. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) Parents are provided with all necessary materials notifying them of policies and programs for language access. In addition, during the intake process, parents meet with the guidance counselor, parent coordinator, and assistant principals, who review all requirements with them. 8  Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? The parent coordinator and guidance team conducts regular surveys to gather feedback from parents on the quality and availability of services. These surveys are disseminated at parent meetings and online through our website and Google platform. School staff and the School Leadership Team meet regularly to review data from surveys and identify any necessary adjustments to services. 9 
