 11X508 School Name: BRONXDALE HIGH SCHOOL Principal: GRACE WHITE 2018-19 CEP-CS 1  Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC)   School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information Bronxdale High School 321100011508 9-12 School Number (DBN): 11X508 Christopher Columbus Campus, 925 Astor Avenue, Bronx, NY 10469 718-944-3655 Phone Number: 718-944-3662 Fax: Michelle Cruz mcruz@bronxdalehs.org Email Address: School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Grace white FredericHirsch Kenya Sims Grace White SantiaGonzalez Alyssa Lopez NatoyaGerman Jacqueline Joseph District Information Geographical District: 11 Carron Staple Superintendent: 1 Fordham Plaza, Room 841, Bronx, NY 10458 Superintendent’s Office Address: cstaple@schools.ny.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718-741-5834 Phone Number: Fax: Field Support Center (FSC)   Team 2 FSC: Executive Director’s Office Address: Jose Ruiz Executive Director: 1 Fordham Plaza, Bronx, NY 10458 JRUIZ2@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 718-741-7400 Phone Number: Fax:   Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Grace White Frederic Hirsch Kenya Sims Shajaira Correa SantiaGonzalez Alyssa Lopez NatoyaGerman *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Jacqueline Joseph CBO Representative, if applicable Kimberly Motieram Parent/PTA Parent/PTA Member/Student Representative  Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Member/ Student Representative Sylvia Grandison Andrew Cloherty Member/PTA Member/Parent Member/ PTA Member/ Teacher Member/ Principal's Designee Member/CSA Member/ Member/ Signature (Blue Ink)   Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with   the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement   Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? BRONXDALE High School is a college preparatory program that prepares our students to make effective post-secondary decisions through our innovative inquiry approach to instruction. Bronxdale has the honor of being selected as a New York Performance Standards Consortium High School Pilot school.   MISSION STATEMENT Rooted in inquiry-based learning, Bronxdale High School is dedicated to fostering a realistic, relevant and hands-on educational experience for all students. Through collaboration, both in the school and surrounding community, students will be immersed in an environment that: · Engages inquiry · Promotes proactive learning · Cultivates curiosity · Supports student thinking and helps them to communicate with clarity & precision in order to instill an intrinsic desire for life-long learning. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. BRONXDALE High School is a college preparatory program that prepares our students to make effective post-secondary decisions through our innovative inquiry approach to instruction. Bronxdale has the honor of being selected as a New York Performance Standards Consortium High School Pilot school. “Learning is complex; assessments should be too.” The Consortium regards performance assessment as a whole-school based accountability system. To support performance assessment, Bronxdale has implemented seven components ranging from establishing a culture of active learning to providing multiple ways for students to express and exhibit learning. That means students must be active participants in the learning process and will be expected to participate in hands-on, problem-based learning and, the development of performance based assessments. As part of the track toward graduation, our seniors present research and develop performance based assessment tasks, and then present their PBATs before an independent review board of community members . For the 2016-2017 school year, students across grades 9-12 also researched and developed PBATs that were scaffolded to the needs and abilities of each grade level. Our rigorous curricula and distributed counseling model foster a caring and academically challenging environment in which our students learn to ask questions, explore and research ideas, work collaboratively and improve their communication skills to be successful beyond high school. Inquiry learning is a form of active learning where teachers provide students with the tools they’ll need to explore concepts and participate in investigating a topic, guiding them toward mastery and understanding of the lesson’s objectives. Progress is assessed by how well students develop experimental, problem-solving and analytical skills using content knowledge, rather than just how much factual knowledge they possess. While we challenge all of our students to achieve their academic best, we align our curricula to meet students' varied needs and offer appropriate supports throughout. For those students who are performing on or above grade level, Bronxdale has implemented inter-disciplinary courses, AP options, and connected with College Now. For those 0  students who may require interventions, we have implemented co-taught classes across the content areas, assigned a co-teaching ENL teacher to the Humanities classes, and created leveled ELA classes that include technology and small-group instruction. In order to offer students increased opportunities for elective, enrichment, and support courses, Bronxdale’s core classes will be 46-minutes long in the 2018-2019 school year. Teachers use an inquiry based approach to teaching and learning via a modified workshop model through which students are engaged in direct instruction immediately followed by guided application of the learned information and concepts. This model helps incite curiosity, teaches students to think critically, and enables students to work their way through problems individually and collaboratively to reach their full potential and prepare them for the 21 st Century world of college and work. Our challenge is to ensure that the level of rigor we see from students in classes discussing, arguing in writing, and researching is reflected in the public measure that are high stakes Regents Exams. This is especially true for our students with disabilities who accrue credit, thrive in classes with the supports we offer, but continue to have difficulty passing the Regents exam on the first administration. During the 2017-2018 school year, we asked teachers to focus on developing strategies and pedagogical practices to provide students with opportunities to become more independent as learners. We focused on fostering student agency. Bronxdale High School is a community where each student’s voice is heard; we encourage student feedback and emphasize self-advocacy among our school-wide push to develop non-cognitive skills in our students. We have received feedback about ensuring that across the vast majority of our classrooms, we see student-centered instruction. We've decided as a school to focus on developing student agency so that students receive the tools and confidence they need to have a voice in their classes, as much as outside of the classroom. We are committed to smaller classroom sizes and students have an opportunity to develop community in their close-knit advisory groups. Student government, youth court, and the Campus Student Council provide opportunities for students to be part of the school’s decision-making and development. We have a strong peer mediation program as one more avenue for student voice, and student leadership. In addition, we will be training student respect reps to help co-facilitate the restorative approaches that our Restorative Practices Coordinator and Student Support Team will help all stakeholders learn and use. During the 2015-2016 school year, Bronxdale rolled out Peer Group Connection (PGC), a peer mentoring program to provide students in grade nine with a peer leader who becomes a support person for the student and will continue to use PGC to teach our upperclassmen leadership skills and strategies to engage with and model for students. We understand that the scope of the work necessitates that all stakeholders play a role in the development of the school and the success of each student. As a reflection of this belief, the school has partnered with varied community-based and cultural organizations including Global Kids, Opening Act, Discover Outdoors, Lincoln Center, Tribeca Film, NY SunWorks, The Nature Conservancy, Center for Supportive Schools, and the Center for Court Innovation. Each of these organizations plays a role in student achievement through varied activities that include the development of curricula, opportunities for field work, in-classroom consultations, teacher development opportunities, and after school engagement. The school has academic partners that facilitate the development of teachers, and the student support team, as well. Through the Institute for Student Achievement, for example, the school gains access to content and counseling coaches, advisory support, and varied resources aligned to school development. Advisory Advisory group focuses on life skills, character education and college preparation. Advisors play a central role in student development by building a safe and positive school culture through which students may internalize the school’s Habits of Success. Advisors are mentors and student advocates who build personal connections with students and families to help every student reach their academic, social-emotional, and career potential. 1  We have revised the advisory curriculum to become the hub for our restorative practices as we implement the use of community circles and other restorative approaches. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. Students with disabilities need improved strategies to perform more successfully independently. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. Teachers have been working on creating different opportunities for students to demonstrate progression toward mastery. This year's LPP work focused on demonstration of learning, which allowed teams to have better conversations about the ways that students can show us what they have attained. As a result, our graduation rate increased from 76% to 85.4% with students earning more credit over the years. Students, parents, and staff have expressed that our school genuinely works well together to help all of our students prepare for the world beyond high school. Where we see a need is in bridging the gap between the inquiry-based work that we do, that fosters critical thinking and creativity, with the demands of the Regents exams, particularly for our special populations. School leaders worked with teacher leaders to create a PD plan that was cohesive and addressed the school focus as well as students' needs. Teachers asked that for the 2018-2019 school year, that PD plan consider the varying needs of teachers, and as a result, we plan to develop a differentiated PD plan with targeted workshops and a menu of options. Our school's instructional focus for the 2018-2019 year will be developed around the idea that: "We will ensure that we have a strategy to keep every student challenged academically, socially and emotionally." 2  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 11X508 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 09,10,11,12 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 453 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 3 4 6 9 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 8 6 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) 2 5 School Composition (2017-18) 87.0% % Attendance Rate 79.9% % Reduced Lunch 8.4% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.7% 57.8% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 7.5% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 6.38 0% 37% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation 82% 65% 76.9% 4.4% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A NO N/A N/A YSH Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A NO N/A N/A NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A YES N/A N/A YES No N/A 116 115 2 86.8% 6.6% 24.1% 28.5% 5.1% 1.1% 4 9% 5.6 N/A N/A 67% 67% 82.8% N/A N/A No No N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A YSH N/A N/A N/A YSH NO N/A N/A N/A NO NO N/A N/A N/A YES 3  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. During the 2017-2018 school year, the school focused on developing student agency, to genuinely prepare kids for the world beyond high school, beginning by teaching them to have a voice, be independent, embrace choice, think and create without excessive scaffolding from teachers. Moving into 2018-2019, we want to make sure that while we continue to foster agency, we meet the needs of every child and push each learner to their next level. In order to do create independent learners, teachers must be familiar with the particular pedagogical approaches best suited to each discipline. Borrowing from Danielson's framework, we know that "a well-designed instruction plan addresses the learning needs of various groups of students; one size does not fit all." We want teachers to plan lessons where the sequence of learning activities is to designed to genuinely engage all students in higher order thinking and high-level cognitive activity through appropriate differentiation for individual learners. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. During the 2018-2019 school year, teachers will be expected to include tiers differentiated for individual student needs on each lesson plan. Doing so will raise teacher effectiveness ratings from 2.7 to 3.0 on Domain 1e by June 2019. 4  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Work with the SpEd Team leader on a PD plan with calendared dates to revisit and reintroduce the use of tiers as a planning strategy. Teachers will workshop lesson plans on grade teams using the tuning protocol to ensure differentiation Instructional coach, and LPP Model Teachers, will lead lesson study work with classroom visits for groups of teachers n/a 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? SpEd Team leader, ISA coaches, admin Team leaders September 2018 through June 2019. October 2018 through June 2019 Teachers across the content areas. Grade Team Leaders; Teachers across the content areas All teachers at LPP visits throughout the year Model Teachers, admin n/a n/a n/a How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Grade teams lead parents through a curricular overview during Parent Meet and Greet. Parent teacher conferences, PupilPath, and the remindme app, as well as the grade team websites will also communicate information. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. The school will use Title I SWP monies and 21st Century Learning Grant to fund coaching and instructional support for teachers across the content areas. Teachers have a scheduled team and common planning time during which to meet with the ISA. SWP monies will be used to purchase texts as well as training for teachers and added in-school coaching. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A C4E X 21st Century Grant SIG PTA Funded In Kind X Other 5  Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 1. By February 2019, data from classroom observations and Advance Tracking report will show growth for at least 25% of staff by 1 level in 1e: Designing Coherent Instruction as per the MOTP Dashboard. 2. In January 2019, teachers will use the ADVANCE Tracker to gauge their own progress on varied components, including Danielson's 1e and 3c, and then submit a reflection packet that includes growth connected to those areas. 2. January and June 2019 - administrators will meet to review overall teacher progress on domain 1. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) Advance tracker and self-assessment tool. School leaders will use MOTP Dashboard for school-wide analysis. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 6  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? Teachers create an environment where students feel safe taking an intellectual risk. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. During the 2018-2019 school year, with more consistency, teachers will plan varied opportunities to demonstrate learning, creating classrooms where different types of learners are comfortable taking intellectual risks, as measured by increased teacher effectiveness ratings for all teachers from 2.8 to 3.0 on Domain 3c by June 2019. 7  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Teachers LPP will use lesson studies and classroom visits to support the development of effective lesson plans that show evidence of planning for engagement. School leaders and content coaches will make frequent observations with pointed feedback for engagement (from planning to implementation) to address the needs and abilities of all learners. teachers Content coaches will work with department teams to develop teachers to plan for engagement and to assess the classroom environment to ensure risk-taking is encouraged teachers LPP Model Teachers, admin School leaders and ISA coaches Administration, ISA coaches September 2018 through May 2019. September 2018 - June 2019 September 2018 through June 2019 n/a 3b – Parent and Family Engagement n/a n/a n/a How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Grade teams lead parents through a curricular overview during Parent Meet and Greet, with represenattives from each department to describe what engagement in a classroom that leads to higher learning will look like. Parent teacher conferences, PupilPath, and the remindme app, as well as the grade team websites will also communicate information. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. The school will use Title I SWP monies to fund training and support for teachers and students, as well as to fund coaching. 21st Century monies will be applied to coaching, too. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. 8  X Tax Levy C4E X X Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 1. By February 2019, data from classroom observations and Advance Tracking report will show growth for all teachers from 2.8 to 3.0 in component 3c as per the MOTP Dashboard. 2. In January 2019, teachers will use the ADVANCE Tracker to gauge their own progress on varied components, including Danielson's 1e and 3c, and then submit a reflection packet that includes growth connected to those areas. 2. January and June 2019 - administrators will meet to review overall teacher progress on component 3C. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. MOTP dashboard and teacher self-reflection. Advance Tracker for final assessment. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 9  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. We've started having conversations about why we have to approach schooling differently - from the science of learning and development, to those issues tied to equity for our students and their families. We also know that while our teachers care about our students, they aren't pushing them enough - 62% of our kids say they feel challenged, while 97% of our teachers say that kids would say they feel challenged. We need to bridge that gap, and know that there are considerations tied to who are students are that can impact the work we do. So, we're diving deeper into learning through a new book study this year. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Teachers will participate in a book study to implement at least one strategy from CRT and The Brain that leads to the development of independent learners, increasing the percentage of students who say they feel challenged inc lasses, from 62% to 70%, as per the school environment survey administered in the spring of 2019. 0  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? ISA Summer Institute: the entire SST and teaching staff was invited to a summer retreat to begin delving into CRT and the Brain and our school focus. Teachers will share strategies and teams will walk away with just one shift they'll make during the 2018-2019 school year. All teachers and members of SST Monday PD time will be used for the book study and discussion sessions. All staff September 2018 - June 2019 Teachers leaders and school building leaders September 2018 - June 2019 Teacher leaders and school building leaders Regular monitoring of team time including minutes to ensure grade teams are working on CRT and the Brain strategy. Teacher teams and SST September 2018 - June 2019 administration Teams will develop common language to be seen on posters and in templates across the content areas. all teachers and SST October 2018 - May 2019 model teachers and team leaders, administration n/a 3b – Parent and Family Engagement n/a n/a n/a How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Parents/families will be invited to a book-talk using Chapter 1 of CRT and the Brain. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. We will need time for planning, and as a result TL funds, SWP, and possible grants, will be used for per session and per diem for retreats, after school work, and ISA Summer. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E X X Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other 1  Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 1. Use lesson study through LPP to monitor implementation. 2. In February 2018, the team will have completed a draft checklist that indicates work products that necessarily promote independent learning through challenging courses. 3. School environment data (in addition to teacher-specific anecdotal reports) will be used to measure an increase in the number of students who feel challenged. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Completed work documents (rubrics, revised maps, and feedback templates) as well as self-reflection. School environment data Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Teachers reported feeling supported this year, as in previous years, however they felt that the PDs, while cohesive and purposeful, seemed "one size fits all". Teachers were pleased with one on one coaching as the targeted support genuinely pushed them to grow. As a result, the school will tailor PDs to offer targeted support and provide teachers with opportunities to self-select. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, in-house survey results will reveal that through a revised targeted PD plan, teachers will feel better supported and pushed pedagogically. 3 Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? School leaders to support teachers School leaders to support teachers July 2017 - June 2018 September 2017 - June 2018 School building leaders, with the support of the ISA school coach School building leaders September 2018- June 2019 School building leaders with model teachers Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). School leaders will work with team leaders to identify PD topics and calendar workshops School leaders will work with instructional coach to create targeted or differentiated opportunities for each PD topic so that teachers may have choice based on need/ability Model teachers and admin will facilitate PDs regularly All teachers n/a 3b – Parent and Family Engagement n/a n/a n/a How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Meet and greet, as well as advisor and parent teacher conferences Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Resources may need to include funding for per session, if training, meeting, or support time before or after school hours is needed. Per diem may be necessary if teacher leaders need to be sent to PDs to support their roles (e.g. consortium, ISA). These may be covered by TL monies. SWP monies to work with ISA coaches to develop. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other 4  Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 1. Weekly check-ins via meetings (minutes from meetings) 2. Quarterly reflections by school leaders and model teachers to self-assess impact of PD and implementation of strategies across teams. (November 2018, January 2019, April 2019, June 2019) Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Google doc reflection to self-assess; advance tracker report; teacher satisfaction at EOY. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 5  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. The school has developed multiple opportunities for parents and families to engage, including extended activities as a community school. However, parent attendance at events is inconsistent across our activities. We'd like to build a stronger community through more parents in at those festive traditions, as well as the academic events. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. As a result of targeted family outreach, by June 2019, the school will increase the percentage of families that say that they are likely to attend a general school meeting or school event from 84% to 87% as per the School Environment Survey results. 6  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? The school will work with Global Kids and the PTA president to create and schedule a menu of activities connected to our school's goals to be distributed before the school year begins. parents August 2018 through June 2019 School will analyze survey data from those year to determine interest of parents for types of activities and best dates/times. parents The school will continue to improve one to one outreach as opposed to phone or mail blasts parents July 2018 through June 2019 July 2018 – June 2019 PC, PTA President, Global Kids as our CBO, and administration Global Kids, PC, administration Global Kids, PC, administration, advisors Incentives, partnerships, food, and babysitting through set aside funds to entice parents to attend 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. Parents will be invited before the school year begins Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. TL and Title I monies may be used for the extra hours needed to build online resources and to provide transportation, food and services for parents Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E X X Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other 7  Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 1. Parent sign-up sheets, parents satisfaction results on environment surveys Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Attendance reports and narrative reflections Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 8  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) Content tutoring Tutoring and prep small group SSR whole-class, done individually. SAT prep Building of a reading community, including re-introduction of SSR and literature circles. Regents prep. Mixed grades – by ability. Intervention courses as needed After school and lunch-time tutoring Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) State assessment scores, SRI scores, scholarship reports, and teacher observation. Regents exam scores for Regents prep. Mathematics Science State assessment scores, mock Regents results, scholarship reports, and teacher observation. Regents exam scores for Regents prep. State assessment scores, mock Regents results, scholarship reports, and teacher observation. Regents exam scores for Regents prep. Mixed grades – by ability. Whole-group, small group, tutoring. Mixed-grade intervention courses. 9 When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) After school and lunch-time targeted tutoring. Saturday school. After school and lunch-time targeted tutoring 2 hours per week. Saturday school 3-4 hours per week. During the school day: Co-taught class, 45-minutes classes After school and lunch-time targeted tutoring 2 hours per week. Saturday Whole-group, small group, tutoring. During the school day: Co-taught class, 45-minutes classes  Social Studies At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) State assessment scores, mock Regents results, scholarship reports, and teacher observation. Regents exam scores for Regents prep. Referrals from the grade teams out of kid-talk, referrals from individual teachers to the Student Support Team, parent requests, and student requests. May be tied to incidents or observations of concerning behavior. school 3-4 hours per week. During the school day: Co-taught class, 45-minutes classes After school and lunch-time targeted tutoring 2 hours per week. Saturday school 3-4 hours per week. Throughout the school day and after school. After school and lunch-time tutoring. Mixed grades intervention courses. After school and lunch-time tutoring. Whole-group, small group, tutoring. Advisory Small group advisory Kid-talk Roundtables Kid-talk: Teachers discussing individual student’s needs. Individual or Small group for counseling: weekly Mediations will vary Youth court sees 2 cases per week; 1 respondent each case. Circles could be whole-class, by group needs, or individual along with invitees. Individual & Group Counseling Social Worker for crisis intervention Peermediations Family Mediations Youth Court Community and Restorative Circles 0  Other restorative practices. Assemblies: targeted and grade-level Expanded student life opportunities including: service, clubs, and activities; QSA PGC Montefiore Health clinic including psych services and partnership with Montefiore's social worker for in-school support. 1  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) TBD 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. School packets including supplies and uniforms/clothing; targeted tutoring, counseling. Technology access is made available as well. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). n/a 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2  n/a 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. n/ai 3  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. Recruitment started in the Spring of 2016. School leaders established relationships with local teacher preparation programs including Teach For America, The New York City Teaching Fellows, and local, reputable colleges like St. John’s, Manhattan College, and Hunter College. Through the ISA, the school reached out to Columbia’s Teachers College as well. Because teacher retention necessarily leads to a well-developed instructional program, the school has invested time, funding, and effort into developing and supporting teachers, particularly new teachers. The school leaders facilitate monthly New Teacher workshops (open to all staff) and coordinate regular professional development opportunities in and out of school. The coaching model is prevalent at the school; coaches from the Institute for Student Achievement along with program-specific coaches support the school’s task of developing and supporting teachers. Model teachers were added during the 2015-2016 school year, and strengthened during the 2016-2017 school year. These positions offer the selected teachers with opportunities to practice instructional leadership, while creating additional supports for the teaching staff as a whole. Proficient teachers are provided with opportunities to take on leadership roles including ENL Coordinator, SpEd Coordinator, Department Representatives and, most significantly, Grade Team and Department Team Leaders. Team Leaders support teacher development by leading their teams through analysis of teacher prompts in coordination with student work to collaboratively provide feedback for improved teacher practice and, ultimately improved student outcomes. During the 2017-2018 school year, we added an IEP Coordinator as a non-instructional position to support both staff and students, and we've added a literacy coach position that one of our model teachers will take on to support teacher pedagogy. During the 2018-2019 school year, we'll add an additional ENL teacher. 4  The Grade and Department team meetings will be facilitated as professional learning communities, giving teachers one more system for support in terms of pedagogy and use of data. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). The school’s PD plan includes school-based PD facilitated by both administration and staff (including teachers and school counselors) on topics that will necessarily help the school meet its school-wide goals. PD topics are selected based on the Advance Tracker reports, input from coaches, needs identified via observations, as well as teacher feedback/requests. PDs are conducted as a series of workshops that include opportunities for teachers to “give it a go” and then share practices and impact. Teachers are provided with monthly workshops, targeted PDs, regular inquiry-based training as well as opportunities to attend the ISA’s Summer and Winter Institutes. Teachers are provided with opportunities to take release days for planning with coaches. Teacher Leaders attend monthly team leader meetings with administration to help facilitate their own meetings and better support their peers. This year (2018-2019) we will create a targeted PD plan that offers teacher choice. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. n/a 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). n/a 5  Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). n/a 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. The school has established teacher teams who attended the ISA’s Summer Institute to plan the school’s approach to curriculum and assessment for the year. This same group of teacher leaders will co-facilitate professional development for teachers during the school year. The team leaders are on the MOSL committee that is responsible for selecting the school’s Measures of Student Learning based on the school’s instructional framework, historical data, and teacher talent. The Team Leaders lead teachers through analysis of baseline and mid-line data in preparation for the EOY MOSL. Team Leaders lead staff through the development of common strategies and protocols to be implemented across the team to address needs identified in the scoring and analysis of the assessments. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Federal Federal Federal Federal 297,441.00 0 0 0 x 6 Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Column B Section Reference(s) Section 5, Part 4B  Tax Levy (FSF) Local 3,141,975.00 x Section 5, Part 4B 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. 7  Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 8  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. Bronxdale High School], in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Bronxdale High School will support parents and families of Title I students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; 9  ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; The school’s Parent Involvement Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in 0  the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the ESSA; ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) Template School-Parent Compact (SPC) Bronxdale High School , in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for 1  improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; 2  ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities 3  ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; 4  ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 5  Addendum: Community School Partnerships Directions: The Community School (CS) strategy is directly aligned to the Framework for Great Schools. Community Schools bring schools and community partners together and integrate academics, health, youth development, and family engagement to provide students with the tools and opportunities they need to succeed. The Core Services in Community Schools are Expanded Learning Time (ELT), Attendance Supports, Family Engagement, and Health & Wellness. Part 1 – Community School Partnerships Goal(s) How is the CS strategy integrated into academic instruction at your school, and what impact has it had on student academic outcomes? This is the first year of the CS initiative at Bronxdale High School. As such our anticipated outcomes will be connected to student academic improvement in core subject areas. Because of the initiative we will have more personnel and the increase in personnel means we are able to push more students to meet the graduate requirements. Bronxdale has also identified several non-cognitive skills to focus on this year, including students’ agency to articulate their performance goals and areas for growth. The CS initiative will mean we can help students gain the skill to articulate their performance goals, their gaps in performance, and how they plan to grow. Indicate the summative goal(s) of the Community School for the 2018-19 school year. Be sure to construct the goal to be SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Realistic, and Time-bound. Literacy is a central focus and the CS initiative will help us use resources to improve literacy at the school. - By June 2018 -75% of 9th and 10th grade students will show significant growth in English Language Acquisition and Reading Comprehension increasing one level on the NYSESLAT Exam. - 50% of students will increase one level on the NYC Performance Assessment across the indicators for argumentative writing. Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Community School Annual Goal(s): How will achieving your Community School Goal(s)--in Expanded Learning Time (ELT), Attendance Supports, Family Engagement, and Health & Wellness--support your academic goals for students? If we achieve our attendance goals and students attend their classes more frequently, they have the potential to make important academic gains. In addition, our focus on family engagement will mean more families can be engaged in students’ academic growth. Part 2 – Community School Partnerships Core Services Action Plan Part 2a. Identify the Community-based Organization (CBO) partnerships that you will develop in ELT, Attendance Supports, Family Engagement, and Health & Wellness, their target student population(s), and scope of the services provided. As well as supporting schools’ supportive environment and attendance work, CBOs should be helping to support your school’s instructional focus. CBO Partnership Lead CBO: Global Kids Target Population Incoming 9th grade students Scope of Service SY18-19 SMART Goal Success mentors By June 2018, Success Mentors will create and implement attendance improvement plans for ninth graders who were chronically absent the 6  Lead CBO: Global Kids Students in grades 10-12 Attendance mentors School faculty along with lead CBO Students in grades 10-12 Tutoring Lead CBO with PC Students in grades 9-12 Parent Engagement previous year resulting in 80% of the targeted students missing fewer days than the previous year. By October 2, 2018, Success mentors will identify chronically late and absent students (2 or more absences per month) using the student data sorter. By October 31, 2018, Success Mentors, along with school counselors, will create reentry/succession plans for students identified as chronically late and absent. By November 2018, students in need of remediation in core subjects will be enrolled in after school or during lunch. tutoring lead by Bronxdale teachers. The Lead CBO and parent coordinator will host at least one educational or social parent activity per month, representing at least 5% of the parent population. At least three activities during the 2017-2018 academic year will include at least 10% of the families. Part 3 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 3a. Indicate resources your Community Partnership will leverage to achieve your summative SMART goal(s) and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Partnerships, personnel from within the school, and Global Kids staff. We'll take advantage of existing structures, including lunch-time clubs and tutoring, to implement some of the work. Part 3b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Tax Levy Title I SWP Title I TA P/F Set-aside X 21st Century C4E 7  Title I 1003(a) Title III PTA Funded SIG Grant School Achievement Other Funding Part 3c. Describe how the school will partner with the Lead CBO to do the following: 1. Community Schools are expected to partner with a community-based partner organization (CBO) and together with members of the School Leadership Team, hire a Community School Director. The Director will lead implementation of the asset and needs assessment process, and other critically important coordinating activities. Indicate how you will leverage this aspect of the work. Community Schools are expected to personalize the needs of all students, through strategic programming and services, as determined by the asset and needs assessment, and must also offer Expanded Learning Time (ELT) and mental health programming. In completing this section, ensure that you think about how: (1) the right services are provided to the right students and families at the right time; and (2) how you will seamlessly coordinate services with instructional programming happening throughout and outside of the school day. Indicate how you will implement this work, and describe other programming you anticipate to be in place to strengthen this initiative. Community Schools are expected to emerge as Partnership Schools, which are places where parents and families feel welcome, actively participate in the conversation and decision-making around the renewal of their schools, and have many opportunities to advocate for their children. Monthly meetings and Community School Forums engaging families and community stakeholders will be a critical part of this family engagement strategy. Describe how you will implement this aspect of the work. Community School Principals are expected to meet on a weekly basis with their Community School Director, select Assistant Principals, key staff, and other CBOs, to analyze trends in data and case manage individual students. Data tools – including the New Visions Data Sorter - and training will be available for schools to use. Indicate how you will implement this aspect of the work. 2. 3. 4. 1. Bronxdale High School and Global Kids will work together to identify community school core goals and create plans to meet those goals. The Community School Director will work with the Bronxdale principal to plan, implement, and evaluate parent engagement activities (including the fall 2017 Family Night, Advisory Board meetings (i.e. Community School Team meetings), the Community School Forum, and other activities that will lead to meaningful involvement from critical stakeholders. 2. There will be several options- students could self-identify for the support (tutoring from teachers). Global Kids will also help recruit students for additional tutoring support, remind students to attend school and attend lunchtime and afterschool tutoring. We will use the student data sorter to identify and target students and work with school guidance. - ELT is tied to regents exams and there will be Saturday academies and boot camps to improve students’ chances to pass. Global Kids will help support with staffing Saturday academies and would help students address test anxiety. GK could also help students during a homework club. 3. At Bronxdale High School, we will hold quarterly Advisory Board Meetings where the lead CBO will invite parents, students, teachers, administrators, community members, and partnership organizations to participate. Together, the Advisory Board will help to plan events like Family Night, monthly parent engagement activities, and the Community School Forum. Global Kids will work with school staff and the Advisory Board to plan, implement, and assess the Forum in Spring 2018. 4. The CSD, along with the assigned attendance teacher, and other key staff will use the New Visions Data sorter to conduct attendance inquiries where students are identified for appropriate attendance, academic, and behavioral interventions. The CSD will meet weekly or biweekly with the principal, or her designee, to discuss the results of the inquiries and interventions assigned to students. As the school staff and the CBO identify and assign interventions, they will continuously reassess to understand how the interventions shaped attendance, academics, or behavior. Part 4 – Community School Partnerships Oversight 8  Part 4a. Key Staff and Partners 1. Name and describe the scope of involvement of all community partners working in the school (include partners supporting ELT, counseling, enrichment, etc.) 2. Name the members of your Community School Team and how meetings will be organized and structured to engage all stakeholders and be focused on results. 3. Explain data strategies including the use of the data sorter, and steps that the school will take to ensure that the appropriate interventions are provided to the right students Community Partners:  Global Kids  OmniLearn  Keys to Abundant Life  Montefiore  Border Crossers  Nature Conservancy  Center for Supportive Schools  Morningside  Center for Court Innovation   United Playaz  Ed Alchemy  Albany Science Research Lincoln Center: LEAD and Theater Community School Team Potential Members:  CSD- Ranti  Principal Quintana  AP of Student Support Team  Restorative Coach  Parent Coordinator  Community Associate  PA Co-Presidents   OmniLearn  Keys to Abundant Life  Montefiore Student Rep from each grade Part 4b. Indicate resources needed including human resources, instructional resources, and schedule adjustments to implement the Community School program. In order to implement the Community School program, the CBO will hire a CSD, two additional support staff, and assign a supervisor. Bronxdale High School will identify a point-person who will support the principal with major decision making as it relates to the Community School initiative. Also, the school will make space available for the CBO staff. Part 4c. Timeline for implementation and completion, including start and end dates. 9  August 2017-June 2018 Part 4d. Mental Health Work Plan Separate from this S/CEP, schools will complete a Mental Health Work Plan that will become an addendum to this document. 0  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 1  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: To help ELLs and former ELLs meet the demands of the Common Core and Regents exams, the school will offer Regents Preparation Academies after school and on Saturdays prior to each Regents administration (In January 2019 and June 2019). Students will have access to supports in Math, Science, Social Studies (Global and US History) and ELA that will include one content teacher and one ENL teacher working collaboratively. Saturday Academy will run for 4 hours each Saturday for up to 5 weeks per semester. Students across grades 9-12 will have access to these services, receiving lessons in English to ensure content-specific language acquisition support as well as learning specific test-taking strategies. Students will have access to resources in other languages, including Regents Prep books available in Spanish. Students have the option to test in their native language. Teachers will use test packets (including notes), Regents Prep books, and videos to help students prepare for their respective exams. In addition to the services provided as part of the Title III Plan, the school will include opportunities for after school support and small-group tutoring during the student lunch period and after school. Any supplemental hours outside of the regular school day will be funded using alternate monies. Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: Teachers will receive professional development to ensure that all content teachers who provide supplemental services have ENL-specific strategies in their toolkit and consider the needs of English Language Learners. Teams will review lesson plans to ensure ELL strategies are present. ENL dept. leader and admin will visit classes to assess that ELL strategies are being implemented. ENL teachers will attend PDs in order to strengthen their skills to support students and learn how to support teachers across content teams. The ENL department leader will attend ELL Liaison meeting offered monthly by the DOE. The school has provided ENL-specific coaching through the Institute for Student Achievement once per week for 26 sessions. Coaching will include observations with feedback as well as co-creation of resources for the content teams. ENL teachers will work with ISA coach to plan a series of PD for whole school and specific contents to address the varied needs of ELLs. 2  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: The school will offer two sessions for parents to provide an overview of how to support students who are preparing for mandated testing. These will be offered prior to the start of Regents Prep, in anticipation of the first administration of Regents exams, and prior to the NYSESLAT, so that parents can help support students as they ready themselves for that targeted assessment. These sessions will be held by an ENL teacher, a special educator, the testing coordinator, parent coordinator and content teachers. Parents will receive invitations by mail, reminders using RemindMe as well as an automated call via our SchoolMessenger system. Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits) n/a  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other n/a n/a n/a n/a Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a 3 Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. n/a n/a TOTAL n/a n/a 4  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 11 School Name Bronxdale High School Borough Bronx School Number 508 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Carolyne Quintana Coach type here ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Jake DeVirgiliis Teacher/Subject Area AJ Cloherty/ELA Teacher/Subject Area Cait DeRousse/SpeEd Related-Service Provider Lourdes Lopez, MSW Superintendent Carron Staple Assistant Principal Grace White Coach type here School Counselor Nicholas Boyiatzis Parent type here Parent Coordinator Tanya Kinigstein Field Support Center Staff Member type here Other (Name and Title) type here C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 0 1 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 458 5 Total number of ELLs 20 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 4.37%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 1 2 4 3 K Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 5 6 7 8 0 0 0 0 9 0 0 0 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? Paste response to questions here: Scholastic Reading Inventory (and Scholastic Phonics Inventory, as needed) 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? Paste response to question here: The data team will meet and review scholarship data, credits, and Regents exam passing rates, as well as SRI/SPI data, quarterly. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? 6  5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] Paste response to question here: n/a 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. Paste response to question here: Grade-level data shows that all but one ENL student are on-track as far as credits. Regents data shows that ENLs have a 50% or lower passing rate on all exams, and struggle more specifically with exams that require higher literacy levels. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. Students are grouped by by grade level in heterogenous blocks, schedule permitting (ie, not every 9th grade ELL has every class together). Integrated ENL instruction is delivered via a co-teaching model with a content certified teacher and ENL certified teacher in front of a mixed group of students including ELLs, Special Education and “mainstream” students.esponse to questions here: b. TBE program. If applicable. Paste response to questions here: n/a c. DL program. If applicable. Paste response to questions here: n/a 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? Paste response to questions here: Lower proficiency students are given additional minutes of standalone instruction in a smaller, self-contained ENL class. These students also receive minutes in standard 55 minute co-taught periods and 90 minute elective classes with ENL certified instructor. High proficiency students meet their minutes requirements via standard co-taught classes and longer elective sections. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. Paste response here: Core content is aligned to common core standards via curriculum planning done in content department teams by content specialists. Curriculum is then modified and adjusted with ENL instructor to direct content instruction towards Common Core aligned language objectives. 7  4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? Paste response to question here: ELLS are evaluated in their home language throughout the year via connections with parents and families--including home language surveys, parent-teacher conferences and phone calls--and informal observations via instructors and bilingual staff members where applicable 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status Paste response to questions here: a. SIFE students are provided additional scaffolding to support language development and accommodate specific challenges related to reading/writing such as sentence frames and cloze texts, and to reduce affective filter in classroom environment thereby encouraging students’ participation in discussion and debates, as well as additional supports as appropriate to their proficiency level b. Newcomer students, in addition to standalone instruction, are provided with scaffolding such as sentence frames, modified readings and teacher support, as well as structural/schedule scaffolds such as placement in smaller class sizes with more opportunities for teacher support c. Developing students are provided with scaffolding listed above as needed and removed where appropriate to encourage language development. Additional attention is directed to building academic language via more complex sentence frames, including emphasizing accountable talk structures and other verbal/discussion strategies. d. Long-term ELLs, historically comprising the largest group of ELLs at Bronxdale, are differentiated for primarily with the goal of developing Cognitive Academic Language Proficiency (aka academic language) with scaffolding techniques listed above as necessary as well as greater focus on more complex language structures, such as those seen on standardized/state/regents exams, grade level complexity texts and college-level material. e. Additional support (including those listed above) is available to former ELLs via (co-)teachers as necessary based on individual student needs and teacher concerns. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? Paste response to question here: As mentioned above, content instruction is aligned to language objectives to help ELL students both access content and accelerate language objective. Language objectives are connected with content/content objectives and allow instructors to assess ELLs progress based on measurable products to demonstrate learning and acquisition of language. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? Paste response to question here: Flexible scheduling is provided with an emphasis on co-taught, integrated classes. Additional support is provided to content teachers via Professional Development centered on supporting ELLs and/or SWDs in their content classes to support all teachers in supporting a diverse student population. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. Paste response to question here: Paste response to question here: Co-teaching and scheduling into ICT sections with an ESL teacher and a special education teacher; leveled texts in ELA; Read 180 and System 44 as supplements in ELA, 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? Paste response to question here: Paste response to question here: PD for staff on strategies and planning for ELLs; adding a stand-alone humanities class for ENLs; block scheduling; ENL-specific advisory 8  10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? Paste response to question here: n/a 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. Paste response to question here: Paste response to question here: Integrated setting; ENL coordinator as point-person for small cohort. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. Paste response to question here: Paste response to question here: Read 180, System 44, ICT setting for ENLs with IEPs, co-teaching with school-generated curricula aligned to CCLS, and stand-alone humanities class. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Paste response to question here: Paste response to question here: Students are encouraged to f=draw on personal experiences and home culture; students are grouped with other students with a common home language; school community encourages cultural diversity and expression. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. Students are grouped by grade level as appropriate to english proficiency level; when not in cohort/grade assigned, pursuing necessary credits with support. ENL committee (admin and ENL coordinator plus data team member) meet periodically. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? Paste response to question here: Paste response to question here: Read 180, System 44, ICT setting for ENLs with IEPs, co-teaching with school-generated curricula aligned to CCLS, and stand-alone humanities class. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). Paste response to question here: Assessments upon entry, school tour provided by the school counselor or parent coordinator, student introduced to admin and office staff, student assigned a schedule and introduced to a peer. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? Paste response to question here: Spanish and English electives (including Spanish for Native Speakers) 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? Paste response to question here: n/a Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? 9  Paste response to question here: ENL Coordinator will provide strategy-specific PD for whole staff and collaboration with each department team Paste response to question here: Lincoln Center's LEAD Program; DOE DELLSS PDs; graduate school courses for teachers of ELLs 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. Paste response to question here: 9 th grade team meetings with specific focuses on ENLs' needs, advisory curriculum to adjust to socio-emoti development at the HS level Paste response to question here: The ENL Coordinator seeks out and attends ENL PDs throughout the year Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? Paste response to question here: Advisor phone calls and one-on-one taregted parent conferences to support individual student needs with bilingual (English Spanish ENL coordinator) and access to interpretation services through the DOE and via school staff. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Paste response to question here: Bilingual outreach for all meetings, conferences, and celebrations. Translation of materials, bilingual community circles, targeted meetings/events. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Paste response here: n/a 0 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Carolyne Quintana, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 1  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: Bronxdale High School School DBN: 11X508 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Carolyne Quintana Title Principal Grace White Assistant Principal Tanya Kinigstein Parent Coordinator Jake DeVirgiliis ENL/Bilingual Teacher n/a Parent AJ Cloherty Teacher/Subject Area Caitlin DeRousse Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach Nick Boyiatzis School Counselor Carron Staple Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Lourdes Lopez Other MSW, Related Svcs Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 2  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 11X508 School Name: Bronxdale High School Superintendent: Carron Staple The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No (*Primary) * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. HLIS, ATS reports, and Emergency Contact Cards, personal contact (particularly with the Parent Coordinator). 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Afrikaans, Albanian, Arabic, Bengali, Bosnian, Chinese, English, French, Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral 3  French Haitian Creole, German, Malinke, Slovak, Soninke, Spanish, Turkish, Urdu, Vietnamese, Wolof, Unknown. 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. Letters to parents ongoing, parent-teacher conference announcements at least 2 weeks prior to each conference, flyers for parent and community events at least 2 weeks prior, policy letters including phone policy and GRP in September, letters from the school leadership ongoing, etc. Translated notices for IEPs generate automatically at least 2 weeks prior to the IEP meeting. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to Meet and Greet Night, parent-teacher conferences, PTA, Parent Focus Group, Open House with circles for parents, fundraisers and dinners, as well as parent meetings to discuss provide interpretation service(s)? 4  student behavioral and academic concerns. The SpEd team offers translation of documents and interpretation for parents, as needed for IEP meetings. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) And, parent coordinator interactions. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? Parent Survey 5 
