 12X682 School Name: FANNIE LOU HAMER FREEDOM HIGH SCHOOL Principal: JEFFREY PALLADINO 2018-19 CEP-CS 1  Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC)   Section 1: School Information Page School Information School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Fannie Lou Hamer Freedom High School 321200011682 9-12 1021 Jennings St. 718-861-0521 Phone Number: School Number (DBN): 12x682 718-861-0619 Fax: Jeffrey J. Palladino jpallad@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Geographical District: 12 Email Address: Jeffrey J. Palladino Matt Spellman CaridadRivera Emily Sintz Marlene Lamboy Nydasha Pollock RusmelynPaulino Danny Morris District Information Kathy Pelles Superintendent: 335 Adams Street, Room 508, Brooklyn, NY, 11201 Superintendent’s Office Address:   Krehfield@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: (718) 923-5181 Phone Number: FSC: Bronx Executive Director’s Office Address: 718923-5145 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) Alexandra Anormaliza Executive Director: 131 Livingston Street AAnorma@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: (718) 935-5618 Phone Number: 718-935-5941 Fax:   Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Jeffrey J. Palladino Kate Belin CaridadRivera Kathy Curtis Marlene Lamboy NydashaPollock RusmelynPaulino Danny Morris Emily Stinz Starr Greer *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/ Member/ AP Member/Parent   Carmen Rosa Edwina Mahan Luz Bracero Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Member/ Parent Member/Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/Parent Member/Teacher Member/ Member/ Member/   Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with   the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement   Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? The mission of Fannie Lou Hamer Freedom High School is to teach students to use their minds well and prepare them to lead productive, socially useful, and personally satisfying lives. The school's academic program stresses intellectual development and political/social involvement in our society. Five "habits of mind" are stressed: (1) helping students learn to critically examine evidence (2) to be able to see the world through multiple viewpoints - to step into other shoes (3) to make connections and see patterns (4) to imagine alternatives (What if? What else?); and finally, (5) to ask, "What difference does it make? Who cares?" These five are at the heart of all our work, along with sound work habits and care and concern for others: habits of work and heart. The curriculum affirms the central importance of   students learning how to learn, how to reason, and how to investigate complex issues that require collaboration, personal responsibility and a tolerance for uncertainty. Our academic program promotes students actively engaging in ambitious intellectual activity and the developing of critical thinking skills. This Rigorous Instruction demonstrates our commitment to the 6 elements of the Framework for Great Schools. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. This aim is accomplished in multiple ways through multiple relationships. Our long standing relationship with the New York State Performance Consortium has provided us with a community of like-minded practitioners that enables us to share best practices, participate in school inter-visitations and develop and review rubrics that evaluate our student work. Our relationship with Children’s Aid Society has built a seamless partnership throughout the school day, and over several years we have built an array of after-school and social services. Through our relationship with Children’s Aid Society, our students have access to medical/dental services, a comprehensive After-School program, leadership development, access to college classes and visits, Community Service and financial assistance. We have also partnered with Children’s Aid Society on two new grants that will have a tremendous impact on our school community. The i3 grant has funded our school for a Parent Resource Center and a Parent Engagement Coordinator to increase parental involvement in the school and therefore increase student achievement. The Community School Grant Initiative funds five academic tutors to work with the bottom 25% of each grade. This collaboration will provide struggling students with additional academic assistance, therefore helping them pass their classes and graduate on time. These relationships are central to our mission and vision and have provided our school community with access to much needed services. This is evidence of our commitment to the Framework for Great Schools; strong family-community ties are vital to our work as a Children’s Aid Society school. Our relationship with Children’s Aid Society enables us to bring resources to our school community that builds a welcoming and inclusive school environment. Fannie Lou Hamer Freedom High School is proud to be one of only a small handful of NYC public schools that have been designated as an Apple Computers Distinguished Program. Our use of technology to create asynchronous classrooms to impact student achievement is a major accomplishment. Our school was invited to apply for the Distinguished Program after extensive work using iPads in the classroom to promote literacy gains and the creation of an iBook to use in professional development to assist teachers to diagnose and treat literacy issues. The enrollment in the Distinguished Program enables us to host visits from school around the globe that are interested in using Apple technology to further innovate programs in their communities. This designation is an example of how effective school leadership develops an instructional vision of how technology can impact students, gathers resources and cultivates other leaders at the school to design and implement a plan for student improvement. The National Education Policy Center acknowledged Fannie Lou Hamer as a Gold-Standard School of Opportunity. We're one of only five schools to earn this award and the only school selected for that standard from NYC. We were acknowledged for the variety and depth of programming that we are able to bring to bear on reducing the opportunity gap for our students. We were specifically designated for our focus on medical and dental health for our students, our portfolio-based assessment and our intensive use of technology for student academic growth and teacher development. This year was also our first year in collaborating with HERE-TO-HERE (H2H) an innovative program in the Bronx, created using the pedagogy of Big Picture Learning to build interest-based career pathways for our students. Students have been enrolled in SYEP to build personal networks and gain social capital through their participation in meaningful learning experiences in community based organizations. Through out the school year they continued their career development by identifying and securing industry recognized certifications. Students participated in internships and entrepreneurship that helped them explore careers and advance their skills. Our key professional development objectives for this school year will be continuing our Peer Observation system and continued implementation of our digital portfolio system throughout the four grades. Through our involvement with PROSE, our teachers have overwhelmingly approved of a Peer Observation system that enables teachers to provide 0  support, assistance and guidance to each other. We have developed a comprehensive system of Peer Observations that provides our teachers time to enter the classrooms of their colleagues and observe instruction, tasks and student work. To support this, we have developed a Peer Observation Protocol that we utilize during our weekly Monday Professional Development to debrief the Peer Observations and include feedback from staff. This is our third year of this comprehensive Peer Observation system and it demonstrates our commitment to building a collaborative teaching staff that is committed to the success and improvement of their practice. During the third year of Peer Observation we have utilized a PDSA (Plan-Do-Study-Act) cycle for targeted intervention of students of concern. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. FLHFHS has a 28.00% of special education students. 61.27% of those students spend between 21 and 59% of the week receiving Special Education Classroom Services. 33.1% of the special education students spend more than 60% of the week in Integrated Co-Teaching classes. 2.82% of the special education students receive self-contained services more than 60% of the week. FLFHS has a 12.00% English Language Learners. Other important factors are a 82% Economic Need Index which is over 20% higher than the city average. Our students also have lower incoming Proficiency Levels in Math and ELA than the City average. Our incoming MAth rating is 2.03 compared to 2.69 to the city and our incoming ELA rating is 2.36 compared to 2.90 for the city. We understand that the specific needs of our student population demand structures in the school that are supportive and enable students to succeed. These structures include block scheduling for students to take longer amount of time to work on projects, two year looping with academic teachers in order to develop relationships and understanding of specific student learning needs, advisory system that enables students to be know well and develop relationships with families. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. We see our challenge as: increasing credit accumulation, increasing attendance and increasing graduation rates. In order to do that, we know we must increase the engagement of students in their schoolwork through improving curriculum and instruction to reach all students and increase student/family feelings of safety and connection to our school. Our goals for this school year focus on teachers working together in PLCs to collaboratively improve curriculum and instruction, as well as school leaders increasing the number and capacity of teacher leaders. We also are strengthening our community school structure to reach all students and families, and increasing student choice and participation in a variety of activities. We have been pleased to see our borough and city average on 4 of the 5 available scores on the Framework for Great Schools to be an above average score. we are especially proud of our role as a Community School is represented by our rating on the Strong Family - Community Ties to be more than 1 full point higher than the rest of the Borough and City average. A key focus for us this year will be to improve our rating on Collaborative Teachers, last year we received a good on the Framework. As we continue to use our status as a PROSE school to implement Peer Observations, we believe that our survey results in that will improve as we continue to use Peer Observation in our professional development adult learning system. 1  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 12X682 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 09,10,11,12 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 473 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 91 91 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 54 33 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 84.0% % Attendance Rate 82.7% % Reduced Lunch 12.5% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 1.1% 68.7% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 0.6% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 4.08 0% 10% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation 74% 0% 66.1% 0.0% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A NO N/A N/A NO Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A YES N/A YES NO No N/A 148 140 78.9% 0.4% 30.7% 29.0% 0.6% 1.1% 6 26% 8.7 N/A N/A 6% 0% 74.3% N/A N/A No No N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A NO N/A N/A N/A NO N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A NO N/A N/A N/A NO 2  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Quality reviews have consistently praised our curriculum as engaging, well-designed and aligned to higher-order thinking and the use of text-based evidence and argument skills. We need to deepen this strength in order to reach more students and help them accumulate credits in 9th and 10th grade. As we know, credit accumulation in 9th and 10th grade is highly correlated to graduation rates. Strengths Include (All above Comparison Group)  64% of 9th graders earned enough credits in 9th grade to be on track for graduation  79% of 10th graders earned enough credits in 10th grade to be on track for graduation  68% 4 year Graduation rate  73% 6 year Graduation rate  69% of students successfully completed approved college or career preparatory courses and assessments  39% of students graduate college ready (according to CUNY standards to avoid remedial classes)  Areas to Improve  37% of students graduated and were enrolled in college or other post secondary program within 6 months.  39% of students graduated college ready. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019 80% of 9th graders will earn 10 or more credits. 3  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Alignment of professional learning calendar including: week long retreat week before school year which starts with nationally known Professional Development center for facilitation of process of PLC development. Teaching Staff August 2018- June 2019 Teaching Staff August 2018- June 2019 Principal, APs, Lead Teachers, Model Teachers & PD Planning Committee Principal, APs, Lead Teachers, Model Teachers & PD Planning Committee Consultants & Teaching Staff September 2018 – June 2019 Principal, APs, Lead and Model Teachers Continued implementation of Fred Newman’s Authentic Intellectual Work rubrics and overlay comparison with Danielson components. All teachers will be member of a professional learning community, spending 100 hours on increasing the intellectual depth of knowledge, connection to real-world learning and substantive conversation in class, which will result in an increase in student completion of digital portfolios, leading to increased credit accumulation for 9th and 10th graders. Teachers will identify 3-5 students in their classes that are struggling to work independently and utilize Peer Coaching to create academic interventions to help student understanding of content and building of skill. This will directly correlate with an increase in student course work and credit accumulation. The progress and growth of the selected students will be monitored in weekly professional development and weekly content based meetings. Looking-at-student work protocols will be used in the professional development meetings and appropriate actions will be implemented based on those meetings (parent meetings, academic interventions, etc.) Use of Consultants for Math curriculum, literacy needs and teacher development to support teacher leaders and address the needs of struggling students, students with disabilities and ELLs. As a PROSE school, teacher document their progress which will be reviewed by teacher leaders and administration. We will also be utilizing the New Visions data tracker provided to us a a Community School in order to keep track of the progress of 9th grade students throughout the semester. We will follow this data in both the Division 1 STEAM and Humanities weekly planning meetings and coordinating interventions in those meetings by looking at student work 4 Administrations, Teachers, Students and Families September 2018 – June 2019 Principal, APs, Lead Teachers and then planning curriculum and lessons to address issues of differentiation in the classroom with specific students. Conversion to a Digital Portfolio system will be accomplished through twice yearly full staff norming of portfolio grading using NYS Performance Consortium rubrics, hiring of technology consultants to build capacity for teacher leaders and administration to implement and monitor Digital Portfolios. Students will present their Digital Portfolios in Student-led conferences with parents, teachers and other important community members. The use of Google Apps in the New Vision Cloud Lab enables us to gather data on Digital Portfolios at strategic check points throughout the school year (November, January, March and May) in order to collect data and improve instructional strategies to improve results 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. CEP goal was created in conjunction with SLT and PTA. Goal will be introduced to the staff during 2018-19 staff retreat and emphasized during "Back to School" night in October. After school assistance and Saturday school will be available to 9th graders that need academic assistance and these opportunities will be promoted by Children's Aid Society's Opportunity Coordinator. 9th grade advisors will identify students in need for extra assistance during Monday PD House Meetings. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. ● Summer of 2017 Planning meetings for administration ● Summer PD Planning committee: Per session for teachers and APs ● Eagle Rock Professional Development Center Services ● Fred Newman’s Authentic Intellectual Work Rubrics on Instructions, Tasks & Student Work ● Algebra Project Math Consultant ● PerDev Perceptual Development Center ● Lead Teachers ● Teaching Matters consultants 5  ● NYS Performance Consortium ● Google Sites Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A X C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Progress monitoring of 9th grade credit accumulation will occur in multiple ways in order to achieve the stated goal. Weekly "House Meetings" in PD will focus on student progress toward credit accumulation, phone call homes to parents to address students falling behind in work and "student talk" among teachers that teach students that are falling behind. Progress reports and parent teacher conferences in November will also be utilized to inform students and parents of student progress toward credit accumulation. In January, during regents week, students that have been identified "In danger of failing a class for the semester" will be brought into school for "boot camp". "Boot Camp" will be held during regents week and it will enable students to work with teachers during Regents week and increase the chances for students to gain credit. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) During four Professional Development sessions in November 6, teaching staff will use the Habits of Mind rubrics to grade student work in Digital Portfolios. The grading of the Digital Portfolios will be done in a Google Platform. Using Google forms, data will be collected to asses progress and collect data on the Habits of Mind indicators. By February, we will expect a benchmark of 75% Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 6  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? Based on our school survey, 67% of student respondents were positive in their belief that we provided a supportive environment. Our result was above average and 18% better than the citywide average and 18% better than the Bronx borough average/ There are multiple factors that account for our students, staff and families reporting that they attend a supportive school:  We have received over $100K in grant money this school year to provide students with Extended Learning Opportunities (ELOs). We realized we need to offer our students more diverse programming in school, after school and during weekends.  We have a strong advisory system that focuses on College/Career readiness, Extended Learning Opportunities, Restorative Justice Circles and academics.  We are a community school in conjunction with Children’s Aid Society. This relationship provides our students with many resources that are beneficial for them in school and in their community. These resources include: 1. An Opportunity coordinator that facilitates Student Government and "brokers' opportunities for students to sign up and follow through with Extended Learning Opportunities. 2. Medical and Dental advocate to provide appointments and follow up for health issues for all students. 3. Three college counselors that are part of our College Success Center. This promotes 9th-10th grade college advisement and education. 4. Four academic tutors that work specifically with the students with the most academic difficulties. This individual and small group attention is given directly in the classrooms. 5. Free vision screening and eyeglasses for every student in the school 6. Five week NYU EXCEL program for college access (College enrichment and SAT prep) According to the 2017-18 School Quality Guide, our school is scored 12% points higher than the Borough and the City on Personal Attention and Support. The school also scored 15% higher than the borough and 13% higher than the City on Social-Emotional learning. This data demonstrates our commitment to supporting the whole child especially as our role as a Community School with Children's Aid Society as our lead partner. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. In the 2018-19 school year the school chronic absenteeism rate was 56% By the end of June 2019 will decrease this attendance rate to 52%. 7  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Advisory structure will focus on attendance – through advisor phone calls home to students that are missing school days. Increase in parental phone calls. Advisors will use lesson plans in advisory that focus on importance of attendance and chronic absenteeism. We will do this by June 2018 though having 90% of our advisories and family groups complete 10 lessons on attendance and chronic absenteeism. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All advisors September 2018– June 2019 Principal, 2 APs, Advisors, other teachers. Documentation of Phone calls home about attendance on skedula by teachers. All Advisors September 2018– June 2019 Principal, 2 APs, Advisors, other teachers. Designated staff to call every absent student every day. Principal, AP, Main Office Staff September 2018- June 2019 Principal, 2 APs, Advisors, other teachers. Children’s Aid Society Parent coordinator will organize attendance meeting in conjunction with School social worker for students with high percentage of chronic absenteeism in the 2017-18 school year September 2018-June 2019 Principal, 2 APs, Advisors, other teachers Principal, AP, School Social Worker, Community School Director, Children’s Aid Society Parent Coordinator 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Children's Aid Society Community School Director will hold meetings with parents and students that are in Chronic Absenteeism range and create action plans to improve attendance. This will occur with 9th graders in the first two weeks of school. Outreach during the summer will also occur through Children's AId Social worker and and event for all new students will occur in August. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment 8  Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Skedula Main Office Staff Advisors APs Teacher House leaders Children’s Aid Society Community School Director Children’s Aid Society Parent Coordinator Advisory Curriculum After School PD on Wednesday for Parent Engagement. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Weekly after school PD meetings to focus on parent involvement Weekly attendance meetings to focus on student attendance. By January, 5 Advisory lessons will be taught in all 4 grades. By January, our overall school attendance will be at 86% Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Attendance will be measured from ATS reports that identify overall attendance and chronic absenteeism Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 9  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. . In the 2017-18 school year, as a part of PROSE, we continued to implemented Peer Observations throughout our whole school. We used the Newman rubrics to define Authentic Intellectual Work in our classrooms. We want to further our questioning and group discussion skills of our teachers in the classroom. The implementation of Peer Observations enabled our teachers to go inside each other's classrooms, share best practices and implement strategies to improve classrooms. These Peer Observations are aligned to the Framework for Great Schools because it enables teachers to have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. This practice helped our teachers with vertical and horizontal planning, designing tasks for students and looking at student work. The success of this implementation was cited in the 2016-17 Quality Review. Our results on the School Quality Guide for Collaborative Teachers in higher than both the Borough and CIty average. In specific categories in Collaborative Teachers, Innovation and Collective Responsibility, Quality of Professional Development and School Commitment our school scores at least 10% higher than the Borough and City averages. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By the end of the 2018-19 school year our teachers will participate in 4 Peer Observations in our Wednesday Professional Development. 0  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Weekly Monday Peer Observation protocols All teacher September 2018-June 2019 Principal APs Lead Teachers All Teachers September 2018- June 2019 Principal APs Lead Teachers Eagle Rock School Professional Developers All teacher September 2018- June 2019 Principal APs All teachers Teachers will participate in 4 Peer Observations throughout the school year. This will be an increase from last year and be aligned to our focus on targeted intervention for struggling students in our classrooms through the lens of Teacher as Coach- Student as worker. These observations will be on a rotating basis each week in groups of four in our Monday professional development. Professional Development Center with Eagle Rock School Professional development facilitation through Eagle Rock School Professional Development Center using an asset based approach. Eagle Rock professional developers will come out three times a year, to facilitate PD, collect data and report findings and plan for next steps in PD. Peer Observations in the classroom Bi Monthly professional development committee meetings will be used to monitor progress of peer observations. Chancellor’s D ay will be used for whole staff evaluation of Peer Observations. Our school staff is split into eight groups of four teachers during our Peer Observation Professional Development. Each week a teacher observes a fellow teacher and through a Peer Observation Protocol, aligns the low inference observation notes from the Peer Observation to the work of students that have been identified as needing interventions.. These notes are documented into a Google form during the protocol and sent directly to a spreadsheet that is used by administration for coaching meetings, observations and check- ins with teachers. Our Peer Observation process follows an Action Research cycle. The first round of observations for each group is designated to use observations to see patterns of the student's work in a teacher’s classroom. Using Election Day PD, teachers observe Peer Observation data for their groups and decide upon a classroom intervention for their classrooms to create strategies for the identified students. The second round of Peer Observation is to observe the impact the classroom intervention 1 is having on the identified students. When the second round is complete, data is used to analyze the impact of the classroom intervention. Our third round of Peer Observation is then designed by each group in response to the impact of the classroom intervention in round two. Our Peer Observation Professional Development plan then culminates in a Chancellor’s Day professional development performance based assessment. Teachers present digital portfolios to each other on their professional growth from Peer Observations and other professional opportunities. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Through PTA and SLT Meetings Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. The PD Committee, consisting of administrators and teacher-leaders and which is open to all interested teachers, plans the PD calendar. We use outside consultants to leverage resources and expertise: Consortium PD Facing History Bard College Algebra Project Learning specialists focused on literacy Eagle Rock Facilitator Affinity Group and New Principal Groups Teaching staff meets weekly to focus on individualized instruction. In addition grade, house and team meetings read and critique student work using school wide rubrics. Teachers also meet weekly in Peer Observations groups to debrief inter-visitation, examine teacher goals, look at student work and plan peer observations. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 2  Using a Google form/spreadsheet system, we are monitoring teachers progress in Peer Observations. Teachers participate in 4 cycles of peer observations and the protocol for the peer observations are documented in a google form and collated into a google spreadsheet. This data is then reviewed in weekly meetings with admin and consultants to address with teachers during weekly consultation meetings, team meetings and coaching. This monitoring will make sure that teachers are looking at student work, conducting peer observations and following up on specific advice given from their peers. By February 2019, all teachers will have had 2 peer observations conducted of their practice. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. By January, teachers will have participated in 2 Peer Observations protocols. We will use New Vision sorter, Digital Portfolios, Nov Progress reports and end of semester report cards to measure the success of students that have been the focus in Peer Observation interventions. The students selected Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 3  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. For the last few years we have tackled the issue of use of digital technology to support teaching and learning at Fannie Lou Hamer Freedom High School with the help of organizations like Teaching Matters, Apple Computers, iZone and Digital Ready. Our school opened in 1994 as a portfolio school and over the years has developed a portfolio system. We have been in the process over the last few years of transferring that system into a digital format. While portfolio existed as a long-term practice at the school, it is not a simple matter to integrate that work with technology. Effective School Leadership data on the 2017-18 survey demonstrates strengths in multiple areas. Inclusive Leadership Instructional Leadership    Program Coherence  Teacher Influence All of these survey measures are above Borough and City averages. In fact, Effective School Leadership has been above Borough and CIty averages for the past three school years. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, our goal for the school year is to have 60% of our 11th and 12th grade students have completed digital portfolios. 4  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Wednesday Staff Meeting in House and Divisions Weekly PD meetings will focus on looking at student work using the protocols from NSRF. These meetings will focus on looking at student work to discuss quality of work to be placed in student portfolios. Meetings will also focus on pedagogical approaches to using Digital Portfolios in the classrooms. 11th grader & 12th grader teachers Sept 2018- June 2019 Principal, APs, Teacher leader, teachers Consultants Monthly meetings with Teaching Matters staff to implement systems. These meetings will focus on the technological steps of creating a Digital Portfolio system. Utilizing a consultant from Teaching Matters, these meetings will focus on the upkeep and creation of Digital Portfolios websites in Google Sites. 11th/112th grade teachers Sept 2018-June 2019 Principals, APs, Teacher Weekly grade meetings will focus on planning of exhibitions that will create final products for students to place in their Digital Portfolios. These meetings will plan exhibitions, review anchor papers for portfolios and look at current student work for moderation of rubric grading. 9th/10th grade teachers Sept 2018-June 2019 Principals, APs, Teacher, lead teacher 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Children's Aid Society Parent Coordinator and School Parent Coordinator will recruit parents through phone calls, flyers and in-person meetings. This work will be done in Back-to-School night and first three PTA meetings of the school year. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Contract Teaching Matters for a technology consultant that will meet with the Principal, AP and Lead teachers every other week. 5  Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. We will use weekly division meetings to upload, assess and check digital portfolio systems for populating digital portfolio folders for student work in progress. We will use monthly division meetings to upload masteries into digital portfolios in specific folders. By February 2019, 50% of 11th and 12th graders will have completed digital portfolios Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Digital Portfolio tracking system through Google docs and Hapara Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 6  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. It is our belief that parents are key partners in the work of promoting children's learning and development, which is why a core component of our community school model is the Parent Leadership Institute. It is important for our students and parents to be comfortable in our school and take an active part in the school community. We need to continue to encourage parents to engage in activities that focus on supporting learning at home and further influencing their aspirations for their child's educations. We want to promote parent involvement in school events and governance, imparting additional information about their role in their children's education, and enhancing their abilities to support student learning and school improvement. We also want parents to connect to one another as key resources for navigating the school and educational system. We also need to provide the resources to promote family stability and growth. On our last NYC School Survey Report, our parents accounted for 98% of positive responses. 100% of parents answered that they Strongly Agree/Agree that the school promotes family and community involvement at the school. On the 2017-18 school quality Guide the school scored higher than the Borough and City average. The school has been above Borough and City average for the past three years. We still want to focus on parent education through Children's Aid that will focus on Computer classes, English as Second Language classes and Sexual education. We believe educating parents on these topics will continue to work of promoting the learning and development of our students and their families. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 30 parents will attend 4 parent education workshops 7  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Parent orientation night: Introduction of Parent Leadership program from Children Aid Society Parent Coordinator. Sign up parents for interest in Leadership program for outreach. Community School Director and former Parent Leadership participants present program and discuss benefits of participation. Organize Parent Resource Center: Children's Aid Society Parent Resource Center will send out flyers and invitations to parents for Parent leadership programs. Parent Resource Center will also recruit teachers, CBOs and teaching artists for Parent Saturday Academy. Parent Saturday Academy will provide parents with education in Computer Literacy (Browsing Internet, Microsoft Office, Google Docs, etc...) Parents will also participate in English as Second Language classes that will teach English to parents who are non-English speakers. Parents will also participate in GO! Chefs/Food justice program in order to learn how to use healthy alternatives for meal preparations at home. Through this program, parents will learn about nutrition, food preparation, health food choices and food justice. Parent sexual education classes: Parents will also participate in Parent Family Life Sexual Education classed to learn about adolescent sexual health and education. Completion of Parent Family Life Sexual Education classes will be celebrated at an end of the year graduation and certificates for all participants. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Parents First month of school parent coordinator, Principal Parents Sept 2018-June 2019 Parents Oct 2018- June 92018 Parent Coordinator, Principal, Community School Director. Parent Coordinator, Principal, Community School Director Parents Nov. 2018- June 2019 parent coordinator, Principal, community School Director If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. Children's Aid 8  Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. i3 grant in conjunction with Children's Aid Society, Per session for Administration to facilitate Saturday school and Per session for teachers to teach Saturday school parent classes. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind X X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By the end of January 20 parents will have completed 2 of the 4 requirements of Children's Aid Society Parent Leadership Academy. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Parent participation in Saturday academies and graduation of Parent leadership program. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 9  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Students that were struggling in academic skills and content acquisition, poor attendance and production of student work Mathematics Students that were struggling in academic skills and content acquisition, poor attendance and production of student work Science Students that were struggling in academic skills and content acquisition, poor attendance and Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) -Interactive writing -Decoding & comprehension assistance -Re-reading -extended time -Revision Online Instruction Support Organization assistance Revision Extended time Online Instruction Support Implementation of Algebra Project Curriculum Interactive Writing Re-reading Extended time Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) One to One Tutoring, Small group in common period, -Tutoring occurs in class In class, small group, quarterly additional class focused on topic as needed -Small group instruction is provided in Extended Day Program - Small group work is provided in Saturday school One to One Tutoring, Small group in common period, -Tutoring occurs in class In class, small group, quarterly additional class focused on topic as needed -Small group instruction is provided in Extended Day Program - Small group work is provided in Saturday school One to One Tutoring, Small group in common period, -Tutoring occurs in class In class, small group, quarterly additional -Small group instruction is 0  production of student work Online Instruction Support class focused on topic as needed provided in Extended Day Program - Small group work is provided in Saturday school -Tutoring occurs in class -Small group instruction is provided in Extended Day Program - Small group work is provided in Saturday school Social Studies Students that were struggling in academic skills and content acquisition, poor attendance and production of student work Interactive writing Extended Time Re-reading Online Instruction Support One to One Tutoring, Small group in common period, In class, small group, quarterly additional class focused on topic as needed Students develop informational literacy using social studies content, reading in a variety of forms, using Google docs to do independent research and presentation. Asset based counseling At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Students that had behavior issues, poor attendance, academic struggle One to One Counseling During school day Restorative Justice Circles Group Counseling Family Counseling 1  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 40 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. As a Community School, we are able to provide many services to all of our students. As a Children's Aid Society School every single student get eye tested and fitted with a brand new pair of glasses that is guaranteed for a full year. We also have a Medical/Dental advocate that is able to set up and bring students to medical/dental services, this is vital for students in Temporary Housing. Through our relationship with Children's Aid Society, we are able to secure New York Times neediest funds for clothing, furniture, food and other needs. Our Social Workers and Guidance Counselors provide independent and group counseling to all students in Temporary Housing. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). n/a 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2  n/a 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. N/A 3  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. Administrative staff regularly attends hiring fairs to identify and recruit highly–qualified teachers. Candidates are interviewed by a committee of teachers and administrators. The administrative staff works closely with the Affinity HR staff to ensure that new teachers meet all require documentation and assessment deadlines. Mentors are assigned to support newly-hired teachers. Staff works in divisions and within divisions, houses, so that all teachers are members of small, cohesive teams and work together on curriculum, advisory, students of concern and scheduling of events. Thus, new teachers join an established structure led by teacher-leaders. Consultants support teachers in developing curriculum, getting to know students well through descriptive review, and using assessment effectively aligned to the Consortium standards. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). The PD Committee, consisting of administrators and teacher-leaders and which is open to all interested teachers, plans the PD calendar. We use outside consultants to leverage resources and expertise: Consortium PD Facing History Bard College Algebra Project Learning specialists focused on literacy Eagle Rock Facilitator  Teaching Matters Affinity Group and New Principal Groups 4  Teaching staff meets weekly to focus on individualized instruction. In addition grade, house and team meetings read and critique student work using school wide rubrics. Teachers also meet weekly in Peer Observations groups to debrief inter-visitation, examine teacher goals, look at student work and plan peer observations. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. n/a 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). n/a Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). N/A 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. As a NYS Performance Consortium school, we have always been committed to a collaborative community of teacher-practitioners. Teacher teams work on using the Consortium rubrics to develop appropriate multiple assessment measures, and they are supported in this work by Consortium Moderation Studies and inter-visitations. Teachers work with students through formative and summative assessments. These assessments are considered both on a student by student basis and in staff and team meetings and are used to adjust curriculum instruction and assessment in accordance with the Common Core Standards 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the 5  consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Column B Section Reference(s) Section 5B Part 3, Section 5C, Section 5D, Section 6, Section 7 Part 4B Section 5B Part 3, Section 5C, Section 5D, Section 6, Section 7 Part 4B Section 5B Part 3, Section 5C, Section 5D, Section 6, Section 7 Part 4B Title I Part A (Basic) Federal 365,706.00 Title II, Part A Federal 0 Title III, Part A Federal 11,200.00 Title III, Immigrant Federal 0 Tax Levy (FSF) Local 2,904,722.00 X X X 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages: 6   Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 7  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. Fannie Lou Hamer Freedom High School, , in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students Fannie Lou Hamer Freedom High School will support parents and families of Title I students by: ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; 8  ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; The school’s Parent Involvement Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; 9  ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Every Student Succeeds Act. ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) School-Parent Compact (SPC) Fannie Lou Hamer Freedom High School , in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student 0  achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act. I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; 1  ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Every Student Succeeds Act.Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; 2  II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; III. Student Responsibilities 3  ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 4  Addendum: Community School Partnerships Directions: The Community School (CS) strategy is directly aligned to the Framework for Great Schools. Community Schools bring schools and community partners together and integrate academics, health, youth development, and family engagement to provide students with the tools and opportunities they need to succeed. The Core Services in Community Schools are Expanded Learning Time (ELT), Attendance Supports, Family Engagement, and Health & Wellness. Part 1 – Community School Partnerships Goal(s) How is the CS strategy integrated into academic instruction at your school, and what impact has it had on student academic outcomes? Children’s Aid Society serves as the lead CBO at Fannie Lou Hamer High School. It’s core services are fully integrated within the operation of the school and core services are implemented in collaboration with the teaching staff to provide in-class tutoring and college preparation. The Student Success Center (which includes staff members from CAS and the DOE staff members) has successfully successfully promoted the benefits of attending college to all grade levels, and successfully supported students in applying to SYEP. Our relationship with Children’s Aid Society has built a seamless partnership throughout the school day, and over several years we have built an array of after-school and social services. Through our relationship with Children’s Aid Society, our students have access to medical/dental services, a comprehensive After-School program, leadership development, access to college classes and visits, Community Service and financial assistance. We have also partnered with Children’s Aid Society on two new grants that will have a tremendous impact on our school community. The i3 grant has funded our school for a Parent Resource Center and a Parent Engagement Coordinator to increase parental involvement in the school and therefore increase student achievement. The Community School Grant Initiative funds five academic tutors to work with the bottom 25% of each grade. This collaboration will provide struggling students with additional academic assistance, therefore helping them pass their classes and graduate on time. These relationships are central to our mission and vision and have provided our school community with access to much needed services. This is evidence of our commitment to the Framework for Great Schools; strong family-community ties are vital to our work as a Children’s Aid Society school. Our relationship with Children’s Aid Society enables us to bring resources to our school community that builds a welcoming and inclusive school environment. Indicate the summative goal(s) of the Community School for the 2018-19 school year. Be sure to construct the goal to be SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Realistic, and Time-bound. 1. 81% of 9th grade students will earn adequate credit accumulation during 2018- 2019 school year 2. 25 parents will attend 5 or more PTA meetings during the course of the 2018-2019 school year 3. Each family identified as living in temporary housing will be provided with at least 2 meetings to discuss needs and possible direct material assistance to ensure student’s consistent attendance 4. Chronic Absenteeism at school will decrease to 55% Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Community School Annual Goal(s): How will achieving your Community School Goal(s)--in Expanded Learning Time (ELT), Attendance Supports, Family Engagement, and Health & Wellness--support your academic goals for students? Being located in the poorest congressional district in the country, our students are impacted by the ravages of poverty. The impact of poverty impacts students ability to attend and function in school. The improvement of attendance, health care and having families in the school building improves students connection to the building and improves the academic progress for the students that need it the most. 5  Part 2 – Community School Partnerships Core Services Action Plan Part 2a. Identify the Community-based Organization (CBO) partnerships that you will develop in ELT, Attendance Supports, Family Engagement, and Health & Wellness, their target student population(s), and scope of the services provided. As well as supporting schools’ supportive environment and attendance work, CBOs should be helping to support your school’s instructional focus. CBO Partnership Childrens Aid Childrens Aid Childrens Aid Childrens Aid Part 3 – Budget and Resource Alignment Target Population Scope of Service SY18-19 SMART Goal 11th and 12th graders Extended Learning Time Entire student population Parent Coordinator Students identified as living in temporary housing Parent Coordinator and Health Advocate 80% of targeted students will earn grade level credit accumulation by June 2019 20 parents will attend 5 or more PTA meetings by June 2019 By June 2019, each family identified as living in temporary housing will be provided with at least 2 meetings to discuss needs and possible direct material assistance to ensure student’s consistent attendance 9th and 10th graders Success Mentors 9th and 10th graders will achieve an attendance rate of 82% by June 2019 Part 3a. Indicate resources your Community Partnership will leverage to achieve your summative SMART goal(s) and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Childrens Aid budget Part 3b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) Title I SWP Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside X 21st Century SIG Grant School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 3c. Describe how the school will partner with the Lead CBO to do the following: 6  1. 2. 3. 4. Community Schools are expected to partner with a community-based partner organization (CBO) and together with members of the School Leadership Team, hire a Community School Director. The Director will lead implementation of the asset and needs assessment process, and other critically important coordinating activities. Indicate how you will leverage this aspect of the work. Community Schools are expected to personalize the needs of all students, through strategic programming and services, as determined by the asset and needs assessment, and must also offer Expanded Learning Time (ELT) and mental health programming. In completing this section, ensure that you think about how: (1) the right services are provided to the right students and families at the right time; and (2) how you will seamlessly coordinate services with instructional programming happening throughout and outside of the school day. Indicate how you will implement this work, and describe other programming you anticipate to be in place to strengthen this initiative. Community Schools are expected to emerge as Partnership Schools, which are places where parents and families feel welcome, actively participate in the conversation and decision-making around the renewal of their schools, and have many opportunities to advocate for their children. Monthly meetings and Community School Forums engaging families and community stakeholders will be a critical part of this family engagement strategy. Describe how you will implement this aspect of the work. Community School Principals are expected to meet on a weekly basis with their Community School Director, select Assistant Principals, key staff, and other CBOs, to analyze trends in data and case manage individual students. Data tools – including the New Visions Data Sorter - and training will be available for schools to use. Indicate how you will implement this aspect of the work. Based on the belief that all students must be known well and given the academic and social support they need, FLHFHS created the advisory system. Our advisory system helps students with decision-making, academic planning and interpersonal skills. All students are assigned a faculty advisor throughout their years at FLHFHS. Typically, each advisor works with the same students for a period of two years. The advisor serves as the adult in the school who knows the student best and works with the student’s other teachers and family in order to oversee the student’s academic and social progress. At Family Conference time, and whenever necessary, the advisor meets with the student and his/her family to review work, set goals and develop strategies to ensure the best possible experience for the student. Each advisor’s group of students composes an advisory. Students meet in advisory several times a week. The school-wide curriculum for advisory includes examination of such issues as study skills, health, safety, social issues, community service and preparation for college and careers. Each year Fannie Lou Hamer Month focuses on an issues of the civil rights movement and its relevance to today’s world. Advisory time is also devoted to tutoring and portfolio preparation. Advisory is the lifeblood of the school and it is where all services from connect to our students and families Part 4 – Community School Partnerships Oversight 7  Part 4a. Key Staff and Partners 1. Name and describe the scope of involvement of all community partners working in the school (include partners supporting ELT, counseling, enrichment, etc.) 2. Name the members of your Community School Team and how meetings will be organized and structured to engage all stakeholders and be focused on results. 3. Explain data strategies including the use of the data sorter, and steps that the school will take to ensure that the appropriate interventions are provided to the right students 1. Community School Director will oversee all aspects associated with ELT, attendance supports, and parent engagement 2. Decrease of Chronic Absenteeism to 55% 3. 20 parents involved in 4 parent education workshops.  CSD and Admin cabinet met weekly to engage stakeholders and collect and analysis data.  Attendance team will meet with CSD weekly to work on Chronic Absenteeism data. This will also be focus of weekly House meetings with advisors.  Parent Coordinator from CAS and PC from Fannie Lou will collaborate on parent workshop recruitment and content  Data strategies will be using ATS CA data to inform stakeholders and outreach to students and parents. Part 4b. Indicate resources needed including human resources, instructional resources, and schedule adjustments to implement the Community School program. Childrens aId staff: 4 college counselors Community School Director Health advocate Parent coordinator Opportunity coordinator 4 academic tutors No other resources needed. Part 4c. Timeline for implementation and completion, including start and end dates. Program implementation will begin on October 2, 2018 and end on June 22, 2019 Part 4d. Mental Health Work Plan Separate from this S/CEP, schools will complete a Mental Health Work Plan that will become an addendum to this document. 8  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): K 6 1 7 2 8 3 9 4 10 5 11 12 30 9  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 2 1 1 Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: Looking at our ELL students' data (8th Grade Test scores, NYSESLAT scores, ELA Regents scores, credit accumulation, Mastery and Exhibition completion) we will target a group of students, 9-11 who need additional support in order for them to improve their academic achievement. When looking at the data of struggling ELLs, see that reading and writing, and completing exhibitions and Mastery portfolios are areas where students need more support. Students will be targeted whose proficiency levels are either Beginner or Intermediate. Beginning in January 31st and continuing until June 20th, ELL students who are struggling to earn credit or to extend their English skills will be targeted for additional instruction during Saturday School to work on their literacy skills. Students will participate in a interdisciplinary (Social Studies and English) class where students and teacher negotiate the topic of study. Saturday School begins at 9:00 am and finished at 1:00 pm - a four hour weekly class. Students will have 20 sessions where they will work with an Social Studies teacher and an ESL teacher and will engage in activities that will enhance their reading, academic vocabulary, and writing skills. Some of these activities could include reading circles, close reading exercises, drafting and revising exhibitions and Mastery projects connected to the content taught during Saturday School. Instruction provided by the ESL teacher will focus on developing stronger reading skills, particularly of non-fiction texts. Writing instruction will be focused on the use of evidence in an argument. Exhibitions and Mastery projects will be eligible to be used in any portfolio (Student portfolios are collections of work that stand in the place of the Regents exams - students and teachers collaborate on choosing appropriate work from classes or other school activities to use in their 10th grade and Graduation portfolios) if they meet the standards on the NY Performance Standard Rubric. Materials for this class will include a variety of non-fiction and fiction reading selections related to the period of study in US History determined by the teachers and students. Text may include Panther Boy, I Know Why the Caged Bird Sings, Short Stories of the Civil Rights Movement, Freshwater Road, Black History for Beginners, Great Speeches by African Americans, Up from Slavery, Still I Rise, The Souls of Black Folk, Slavery by Another Name. In addition teachers will collect images, film clips and other non-text based materials to enhance instruction. All instruction will be in English, however home language support will be provide through whole class, individual conferencing and targeted intervention. Parents will be invited through weekly mailings that will be in English and Spanish, as well as outreach phone calls in English and Spanish to parents from the Children's Aid Society Parent Coordinator. Records will be kept by the teachers and the Children's Aid Society Parent coordinator that assists with the Saturday Parent Academy. 0  Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: On alternate Wednesdays, starting in October 1st and continuing through May 20th, 2017, from 2:45 til 4:00 pm teachers (14 sessions in total) will work in teacher teams to leverage technology to increase student achievement. Session 1 will run from October 1st to November 5th, session 2 from November 12th to December 17th, session three from January 14th to March 11th, and session 4 from April 1st to May 12th, the last two meetings teachers will share their learning. Teachers will be organized in groups and rotate through these meetings, academic, Special Education (who work with ELLs) and ESL teachers will participate. They will begin session 1 learning to using video to analyze student reading and then choosing interventions to increase student's ability to decode, read fluently, and/or build comprehension depending on individual student needs. Next they will learn to use the iPad as a reading tool to support stronger independent reading, including using the read aloud function, dictionary, and marking up functions. Next they will learn to use digital portfolios to develop student writing process and to help students to be able to engage in that process independently, including working students documenting their academic growth in the area of language (particularly with reading reflections, reflections on their writing, and demonstrating their writing process through documenting revision processes). Sessions will be taught by various consultants and teachers with expertise with the various technologies. Consultants from the Perceptual Development Group and English teacher and staff Reading expert, Lisa Lindstrom, will facilitate the group using video to analyze ELL student reading and determining interventions; Luz Bracer, Special Education Teacher and iPad specialist, and consultants from Teaching Matters will lead PD related to using iPads as reading tool in the classroom to increase student reading independence; Marilyn Byrd, English teacher and designer of the digital portfolio practice for the 9th and 10th grade, and consultants from Teaching Matters will lead PD related to using digital portfolios to develop and document writing skills particularly looking at the use of evidence in argumentative essays. This professional development is paid for with additional funds from tech grants. PD will also focus on Descriptive Review of struggling students through Peer Observations. Teachers will observe other teacher's classrooms throughout the week and use a Peer Observation protocol to debrief classroom visits, discuss treatments for students and suggestions in pedagogical approach for fellow teachers. All notes and attendance will be submitted through Google forms and collected directly into a spreadsheet. All records and agendas will be documented in Google Forms and be filled in Google drive. Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration  topics to be covered 1  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities  name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities Begin description here: Parents of ELL students often find language to be a barrier to engaging fully in their children's academic lives. To that end, Fannie Lou Hamer Freedom High School, in partnership with our CBO Children's Aid Society (CAS), provides ESL classes for parents during Saturday Parent Academy. English as a Second Language classes are taught by an ELS teacher (who will provide translation services) every Saturday, from 9 - 12. Classes started October 22th, 2016 and will continue until June 17, 2017(a total of 29 sessions) and are three hours long. Classes focus on building conversation skills and writing and reading skills. The content focus will be on learning the language skills necessary for everyday life. Parents are notified though the Children's Aid Society Parent Coordinator (a Native Spanish speaker) and the Fannie Lou Hamer Freedom High School Parent Coordinator (also a Native Spanish speaker) phone calls. In addition flyers in English and Spanish were sent home. CAS provides the additional resources to fully fund this program. Agendas for these meetings will be kept on file and sign-in sheets will be provided. Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits)  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) 2 Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. Travel Other TOTAL 3  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 12 School Name Fannie Lou Hamer Freedom High School Borough Bronx School Number 682 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Jeffrey J. Palladino Coach Inedla Juarbe ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Valerie Mantz Teacher/Subject Area Willmary Rose Teacher/Subject Area Related-Service Provider Marybeth Kachnic Superintendent Kathy Rehfield-Pelles Assistant Principal Susan Schutt Coach School Counselor Michele Rodriguez Parent Peter Torres Parent Coordinator Marlene Lamboy Field Support Center Staff Member type here Other (Name and Title) C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 2 2 1 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 1 1 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 500 4 Total number of ELLs 43 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 8.60%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 1 2 4 3 K Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 5 6 7 8 0 0 0 0 9 0 0 0 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? Fannie Lou Hamer Freedom High School considers student 8th grade ELA and Math scores, English Regents, and individual data in assess literacy skills. In addition we use QIRI testing and Achieve 3000 to gain insight into students’ literacy levels. The data indicates that literacy must be a major focus of instruction. This data, when added to our overall school data, confirms that our school must maintain literacy as the focus of our instructional program. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? Teacher teams in Humanities and Math/Science provide teachers an opportunity to review data and plan instruction. In addition, peer observation teams also provide ENL teachers with an additional teacher team to review student data and plan instruction. Teachers also work with consultants on a semester basis to help individualize support for students. Finally, professional development meetings provide teachers with an opportunity to review best practices. 5  3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? Fannie Lou Hamer Freedom High School uses a variety of tools to assess the progress of our ENL students. We look at credit accumulation, completion of performance assessment tasks, Portfolio grades, classroom assessments, NYSESLAT data, Regents data, student and family interviews, NYC Progress Report, and other data collected for state and federal accountability. Currently we see that our program is moving kids forward in the language acquisition and toward 4 year graduation. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? Teachers use peer observations to identify interventions for students and to monitor the efficacy of their choices. In addition we offer Saturday class, after school classes, and tutoring. Teachers participate in our Individualization Project, where teachers work with consultants to build their skills at identifying and monitoring interventions for particular students. Currently we find these structures provide students with the support they need to be successful in school and building English language skills. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] We do not have K-5 students. Our school data is looked at periodically in house and team meetings to support ELLs. Data that is extremenly important is work completed for exhibitions and submitted portfolio pieces. This data is looked at and then used when necessary for tutoring, consultants and use in PD 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. We look at a wide variety of tools to determine the efficacy of our ENL program. We look at test scores from the NYSESLAT and ELA Regents exam and use the EDAT. In addition we examine completion rates and grades for exhibtions, materies, portfolios and panels and general credit accumulation. We see that students overwhelmingly perform well listening and speaking. Students in all grades struggle most with the reading and writing. Regents scores among all groups bears out this finding. English Language Learners have difficulty passing the ELA Common Core Exam, often needing a number or opportunities to take the exam before they are able to pass: however with a cycle of repeated practice most do pass the Regents and graduate. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? We review our overall findings in bi-annual state of the school staff meetings. House meetings and team meetings reivew the data more regularly to better provide regular feedback to administrative staff on the overall program and adjustments that might improve our program. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. Fannie Lou Hamer Freedom High school is a setting in which the inclusion model is practiced. All students – general education, special education, and English Language Learners – participate in all facets of school life. English Language Learners are mainstreamed in general education high school classes. Ninth and 10th graders are block programmed and 11th and 12th grade classes are ungraded. All classes are heterogeneous. ELL instruction is delived in integrated 6  ELL and discipline based classes. Standalone ENL instruction is provided in a single period by ENL or Bilingual certified teachers. In classes where ENL is integrated into discipline based classes either an ESL teacher leads the class, an ESL teacher co-teachers or provides support to ELL students during a portion of the class. b. TBE program. If applicable. Fannie Lou Hamer Freedom High School does not have a TBE program c. DL program. If applicable. Fannie Lou Hamer Freedom High School does not have a DL program 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? Fannie Lou Hamer Freedom High School has a decentralized organizational structure, where the school is divided into houses. Each house has mixed age, interdisciplinary classes which are block programmed. Freestanding ENL is provided each day by an ESL certified or Bilingual certified instructor for 180 minutes for both entering and emerging ELL students. In addition 180 mins of ENL/ELA instruction and 180 mins of ENL/Social Studies instruction is provided to entereing and emerging ELL students. Spanish teachers provide HLA instruction for 180 mins. For students who are transistioning and extending ELLs, we provide 180 mins of standalone ENL instruction and 180 minutes of ENL/ELA integrated instruction. Students who's level is commanding receive 180 mins of standalong ENL and 90 mins of ENL/ELA instruction. Standalone ENL instruction if provided by ESL teachers. In integrated classrooms, ESL teachers work either as co-teachers or provide support for ELL students over the course as push-in teachers. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. We address the specific needs of ELL students through content area instruction and a balanced literacy program. Our school achieves coherence by using the components of a balance approach to learning. These include an interactive mini-lesson, partner and small group work, independent work, whole class sharing, and summary applications, after class activities. The model provides lenses through which learning is planned for and implemented, which include student engagement, student product and real world application, and multiple ways of assessing that work. All components of the model include reading, writing, and discussion. In English, student would use the techniques to study whole class high school level texts such as Medea, Night, Dreams of My Father, and To Kill a Mocking Bird. In Social Studies student would use the techniques to access and practice concepts including global studies, world religions, American history and government. In science student would use these techniques and experimentation to access and practice concepts in living environment and physical science. In math students use these techniques to access and practice concepts in algebra, geometry, and trigonometry. The teachers work with students developing and infusing academic language through interdisciplinary, thematic teaching following Anna Whilchomnot’s principals of academic language development. Teachers model, observe and analyze student learning. S/he will advise, coach, guide, and monitor student understanding and extend learning to future study. All learning activities take place within the context of the Principles of Learning which include among others, setting clear goals and high expectations and standards for all students and developing an effective means of assessing student progress in meeting the Common Core Standards. We, also, follow Pauline Gibbon’s suggestions for scaffolding ELL students through visual, hand on instruction, contextualization and using an interdisciplinary approach. IN addition we use field trips and service learning to enhance language acquisition. English Language Learners improve their writing skills through writing workshop techniques that support a fluency/clarity/correctness model of development. Students advance in reading by reading whole books, guided by a literacy teacher, ELL students choose ‘just right books’ to meet their diverse language needs. Mathematics and science classes use hands on activities, labs, inquiry, and small group instruction. This group work enhances language development through both the need for students to talk to one another’s and also through student presentations. The ESL teachers consult with curriculum teams and individual teachers to provide content support for ELLs. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? Native Language Arts teachers evaluate all students’ native language literacy before placement into language classes. 7  5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status a. Our general approach to SIFE students includes a significant analysis of the available data, including formative assessments and teacher reports, to determine the specific needs of individual students. This group requires a strong emphasis on literacy skills. The consistent approach to literacy across the curriculum and across grade level provides support for SIFE students. Practices include the development of academic vocabulary, building background knowledge and providing ample opportunity for students to use a variety of content input (written, visual, audio) to develop conceptual understandings. Our Portfolio system and Panel presentations focus teachers and students on using academic language and intellectual skills in presenting their understandings about particular content across the disciplines. Small group instruction is the primary tool teachers use to provide differentiation for students, but may also include differentiated classroom assignments, homework, and projects. Teachers also differentiate through use of native language (Choice Book units) and by individualizing instruction. Block programming allows students to support one another in their academic pursuits in all ways, but particularly through the use of student translation. b. Available data for students who have received 0-3 years of ELL service is examined to help determine the needs of this group of students. Currently this group of students is showing strong skills in speaking and listening and are having some difficulty with reading and writing. The consistent emphasis on literacy across the curriculum and across grade level provides support for ELL student with 0-3 years of service. Practices include development of academic vocabulary, building background knowledge and providing ample opportunity for students to sue a variety of content input (written, visual, audio) to develop conceptual understandings. Our Portfolio system and Panel presentations focus teachers and students on using academic language and intellectual skills in presenting their understandings about particular content across the disciplines. Small group instruction is the primary tool teachers use to provide differentiation for students, but may also include differentiated classroom assignments, homework, and projects. Teachers also differentiate through use of native language (Choice Book units) and by individualizing instruction. Additionally block programming allows students to move through academic classes together allowing them to use their native language to help one another to move through content and classroom experiences. c. In the group of student who have 4-6 years of service, students again are performing strongly in speaking and listening and are in need of focused instruction in reading and writing. The consistent emphasis on literacy across the curriculum and across grade level provides support for ELL students. Practices include the development of academic vocabulary, building background knowledge and providing ample opportunity for students to use a variety of content input (written, visual, audio) to develop conceptual understandings. Our Portfolio system and Panel presentations focus teachers and students on using academic language and intellectual skills in presenting their understandings about particular content across the disciplines. Small group instruction is the primary tool teachers use to provide differentiation for students, but may also include differentiated classroom assignments, homework, and projects. Teachers also differentiate through use of native language (Choice Book units) and by individualizing instruction. d. In our more than six years of service category, data indicates again that speaking and listening skills are strong and reading and writing are the areas of weakness. The consistent emphasis on literacy across the curriculum and across grade level provides support for ELL students. Practices include development of academic vocabulary, building background knowledge and providing ample opportunity for students to sue a variety of content input (written, visual, audio) to develop conceptual understandings. Our Portfolio system and Panel presentations focus teachers and students on using academic language and intellectual skills in presenting their understandings about particular content across the disciplines. Small group instruction is the primary tool teachers use to provide differentiation for students, but may also include differentiated classroom assignments, homework, and projects. Teachers also differentiate through use of native language (Choice Book units) and by individualizing instruction. e. In the first and second years after students have scored proficient on the NYSESLAT we continue to emphasize the development of literacy across our curriculum and across grade levels in order to prepare students for college. Practices include development of academic vocabulary, building background knowledge and providing ample opportunity for students to sue a variety of content input (written, visual, audio) to develop conceptual understandings. Our Portfolio system and Panel 8  presentations focus teachers and students on using academic language and intellectual skills in presenting their understandings about particular content across the disciplines. Small group instruction is the primary tool teachers use to provide differentiation for students, but may also include differentiated classroom assignments, homework, and projects. All ELL students and students are within 2 years of testing out of ELL status are provided with test accommodations including extended testing time (time and a half), and the use of a glossary. For the ELA Regents exam a third reading of the listening section of provided. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? Classroom content in ELL-SWD classes is planned in discipline based teacher meetings. Curriculum is reviewed for congruence with grade level expectations and performance assessment rubrics. Inquiry groups across the school review assessments and rubrics on a regular basis. In order to provide students access to grade level material ELL-SWD teachers use a variety of strategies including guided reading, small groups instructions, mini lessons, groups work, adapted materials, and computer assisted instruction, including iPads which read text to students when necessary. ELL-SWD students are identified as bilingual on their IEP and receive an alternative placement para. The para works with the Special Education teacher and the ESL teacher to adapt materials for the student. Students’ native language is supported through Spanish language classes and through Choice book units in English classes. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? Classroom content in ELL-SWD classes is planned in discipline based teacher meetings. Curriculum is reviewed for congruence with grade level expectations and performance assessment rubrics. Inquiry groups across the school review assessments and rubrics on a regular basis. In order to provide students access to grade level material ELL-SWD teachers use a variety of strategies including guided reading, small groups instructions, mini lessons, groups work, adapted materials, and computer assisted instruction, including iPads which read text to students when necessary. ELL-SWD students are identified as bilingual on their IEP and receive an alternative placement para. The para works with the Special Education teacher and the ESL teacher to adapt materials for the student. Students’ native language is supported through Spanish language classes and through Choice book units in English classes. IEPs are reviewed by the Assistant Principal for Special Education to ensure that students are receiving mandated services. Students who are ELL and SWD, students are in classes where either their lead teacher is an ESL teacher or their ICT teacher is certified bilingual. All students whether SWD or ELL or both programs are reviewed to ensure that they are receiving services. All students programs are reviewed to ensure that they are programmed in order to meet graduation expectations. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. Targeted intervention during the schools day includes tutoring and the provision of extra time through session held during lunch, gym, and advisory. Content area teachers also provide intervention through the extended day time during the common period. In ELA we use the common period to target students who need basic reading instruction using Achieve 3000, language enrichment focusing on skills needed for the ELA Regents Exam, and in addition students may take the College Access Success Psychology and Sociology courses which focus on content area knowledge and skills necessary for college success. In Math we use the common period to target students who need math remediation and concept enrichment in order to app the Math Regents. College Access Success courses in math may also be taken which focus on content area knowledge and skills necessary for college success in Math. In Social Studies we use the common period to target students who need content area support to complete Language and exit portfolios in the Social Sciences where academic language and content area concepts are focused on. In addition students may take College Access Success courses in psychology and sociology to enhance content 9  area knowledge and develop the skills necessary to have college success. In Science the common period is used to target students who need support in developing academic language in the sciences. All interventions are provided in English, however our many of our pedagogical staff are also Spanish speakers and use Spanish when necessary to support student learning. As a school that services a high needs population many of the interventions for SIFE, 0-3, 4-6, and long term ELLs are embedded in the school design and curriculum. In addition, we offer tutorial and social service support for students as appropriate. The bulk of our ELL students are long term ELLs. A large number of these are ELL SWD students and special education teachers’ work with those students on acquiring literacy and content area skills. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? We have gotten many grants this year to provide ELOs for students. We will be working with Rocking the Boat, Dreamyard, Playing for keeps and Global Kids, to name a few. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? None 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. All ELLs have equal access to all school sponsored and CBO sponsored activities. Academic programs are integrated, ELL students and GE students are in the same classes and services are provided to students who need them through differentiation and individualization. Extracurricular activities are available to all students. Students are invited by mail home, advisory announcements, and classroom announcements. ELL students participate in all activities and CBO personnel are bilingual and reach out to parents. After school activities include Children's Aid Society After-School programming which includes cooking, weight lifting, gaming, EXCEL, and other activities. We also offer a PSAL program including basketball, volleyball, wrestling, baseball and softball. In addition, Fannie Lou Hamer Freedom High School offers Saturday school, where students are able to work on language acquisition. CAS uses a mix of federal, state, city and private monies to provide afterschool, mental health, family clinic, dental, college advisement and summer programming in order to provide students with high levels of support and opportunity. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. Instructional materials include teacher developed curriculum, relevant articles and readings, choice books (literature in both English and Spanish), and whole class literature selections. In English, students would use the techniques to study whole class high school level texts such as Medea, Night, Dreams of My Father, and To Kill a Mocking Bird. In Social Studies students would use these techniques to access and practice concepts including global studies, world religions, American history and government. In science students would use these techniques and experimentation to access and practice concepts in live and physical science. In math students use these techniques to access and practice concepts in algebra, geometry, and trigonometry. Each classroom is equipped with 4 to 6 desktop computers and a SmartBoard. Students use Achieve 3000 to better develop their reading and comprehension skills. Students in Math and Science classes use graphing calculators and general scientific materials such as scalpels, beakers, pipets, and other equipment. When necessary, the ESL teacher (who is also a Spanish speaker) or classroom teacher will edit classroom materials to include limited Spanish translation when needed. Native language material include literature, newspapers, magazines, films, and textbooks. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Fannie Lou Hamer Freedom High school provides two years of Foreign Language instruction in Spanish. Our ELL population speaks Spanish exclusively. Students are screened each year to determine their level of literacy in Spanish before they are placed in a particular class. The overall goal of the Spanish program at our school is to introduce a second language to students who speak only English and to enhance and expand the literacy in Spanish for students who have experience in the language. Beginner classes introduce students to the cultures and language of Spanish speaking peoples; while more advanced classes ask students to read, write and speak in Spanish. Spanish textbooks include Spanish for Mastery 1 & 2, Sendas Literarias, Leamos un Cuento, La Casa en Mango Street. 0  in regular content area classes, ELL students are buddied up by their skill levels to provide students with weaker English language skills a person who can provide clarity on instructions or classroom activities. In addition, classrooms are stocked with Englsih/Spanish dictionaries for students to use. We provide technological support including iPads to support students when independently reading and to provide translation when needed. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. All material used in ELL instruction and academic support are grade and age level appropriate. We aim to provide high school level content and materials for the high school level students. In English, students would use the techniques to study whole class high school level texts such as Medea, Night, Dreams of My Father, and To Kill a Mocking Bird. In Social Studies students would use these techniques to access and practice concepts including global studies, world religions, American history and government. In science students would use these techniques and experimentation to access and practice concepts in live and physical science. In math students use these techniques to access and practice concepts in algebra, geometry, and trigonometry. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? Instructional materials include teacher developed curriculum, relevant articles and readings, choice books (literature in both English and Spanish), and whole class literature selections. In English, students would use the techniques to study whole class high school level texts such as Medea, Night, Dreams of My Father, and To Kill a Mocking Bird. In Social Studies students would use these techniques to access and practice concepts including global studies, world religions, American history and government. In science students would use these techniques and experimentation to access and practice concepts in live and physical science. In math students use these techniques to access and practice concepts in algebra, geometry, and trigonometry. Each classroom is equipped with 4 to 6 desktop computers and a SmartBoard. Students use Achieve 3000 to better develop their reading and comprehension skills. Students in Math and Science classes use graphing calculators and general scientific materials such as scalpels, beakers, pipets, and other equipment. When necessary, the ESL teacher (who is also a Spanish speaker) or classroom teacher will edit classroom materials to include limited Spanish translation when needed. Native language material include literature, newspapers, magazines, films, and textbooks. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). We invite ELL student to Orientation to develop an understanding of our portfolio system and house system, and have an opportunity to meet teachers and support staff who will be working with them in the upcoming year. We also invite ELL students to participate in our Summer Bridge program to help them get accustomed to our balanced learning and interdisciplinary approaches to teaching and learning. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? We offer Spanish to all ELL students. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? no Dual Language Program 1  Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? Our ELL staff participate in a variety of external conferences each year in order to keep current on best practices and new trends in ESL and their content areas and are encouraged to attend OELL offerings, which highlight working with ELLs in the content areas, differentiation, scaffolding, and best ESL practices. The staff as a whole focuses on PD for literacy for the ELL and non-ELL student. All Aps, the principal, all teachers including Special Education teachers and ESL teachers, and the speech therapist attend pedagogical professional development. The parent coordinator and the counselors focus on providing social and practical support and therefore do not participate in professional development focused on instructional delivery, although many are bilingual. The school does not have a full time psychologist or OT or PT providers or a secretary. The school as a whole has aligned curriculum with common core standards. As teachers have implemented these units, particular awareness of the need for increased literacy support and the ability to tackle complex texts which emerges for both ELL and non-ELL students has taken center stage of our professional development program. We have begun a school wide literacy initiative focusing on training High school teachers to analyze student literacy in the categories of fluency, decoding, and comprehension and in particular how this support needs appear in ELL students as a support for the CCSS. In addition ESL teachers and Special Education teachers who serve ELLs attend regular professional development hosted by our network. In a recent session, teachers identified language objectives for students and aligned them to common core standards and the curriculum 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. Students transitioning into Fannie Lou Hamer Freedom High School are provided with orientations and the Summer Bridge program to introduce them to our portfolio system, performance based assessment and our unique culture of teaching. For ELL students in particular, the Summer Bridge program provides the ESL teacher and house teachers an opportunity to meet the students and assess their strengths and weakness. School leadership focuses on coordinating activities and troubleshooting difficulties. College Advisors focus on transition to the next stage of post-secondary education. At Fannie Lou Hamer Freedom High School professional development is built into the school program on a weekly basis (Humanities and Math/Science Teams meet 2 hrs each week, House Meetings are 30 minutes each week) and is mandated for all staff members (every Monday for an hour and a half and every Wednesday for 50 minutes). Our ESL specialist participates in House meetings and discipline team meetings. In the context of these meetings, staff reviews student achievement data and brainstorm interventions for particular kids. Staff reviews student work and develops strategies for increasing student achievement. In these meetings, our ESL teacher is able to engage staff members who have questions about serving ELL students and is able to provide individualized professional development to teacher around best practices for ELL students. The staff at large participates in professional development provided by literacy specialists from Perceptual Development Institute, Math consultants from Teachers' College and Bard College and ELL instructional specialists. Topics of instruction will not be limited to: Balanced Literacy, Balanced Mathematics, ESL Methodologies and Strategies, The Principles of Learning, Using Data to Drive Instruction, Formal and Informal Assessment, Formative and Summative Assessment. The staff examines research in second language learning, acquisition and techniques to improve communication between home and school. In addition, the on-staff ESL teacher meets weekly with groups of teachers to discuss and scaffold their plans for literacy instruction, particularly focusing on the use of independent student research in the classroom, including library skills, note taking, forming a thesis and academic notation. This year all staff participated in Literacy training provided by the Perceptual Development Institute where teachers reviewed videos of ELL students reading. We analyzed the videos using three categories decoding, fluency, and comprehension then developed interventions for teachers to use with students. On Chancellor's Conference Day at the end of the January Regents Administration and in June we will continue this work on literacy interventions. 2  Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? Annual individual meetings are scheduled throughout the yearto discuss individual student progress. Translation is provided through school staff. When necessary, phone conferences can be organized to accommodate parent schedules 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Parent involvement include regular Parent Association meetings, the School Leadership Team meetings, various family celebration, evening performances and demonstrations of student work, parent workshops such as: College Night and Financial Aid night. The Parents of ELL students are welcome to attend these events. At all major events, translation is provided by a member of the Fannie Lou Hamer HS staff. Our CBO, Children's Aid Society (CAS) provides a variety of parent workshops, including ways ot access health care, mental health services, and adult education services throughout the city. Immigration information and services are also offered. CAS also provided celebratory events for families including Thanksgiving and Holiday celebrations, Hispanic and African American history celebrations, and Mother's and Father's day celebrations. All CAS activities include interpretation provided by staff. ELL parents also have ESL classes on Saturday, Advisor system that has parents being contact by academic adviosr of their child. Our parent coordinator provides translation at Parent Association meetings, and all celebrations of culture and community at our school. In addition she attends all our PA meetings. In addition, to our parent coordinator, we have a team of school aids who do daily attendance calls in Spanish and develop strong relationships with parents. The support staff provide translation when needed at all individual meetings with parents. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. 3 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Jeffrey Palladino, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 4  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: School DBN: Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Jeff Palladino Title Principal Sue Schutt Assistant Principal Marlene Lamboy Parent Coordinator Valerie Mantz ENL/Bilingual Teacher Peter Torres Luz Bracero Parent Teacher/Subject Area Inelda Juarbe Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach Michele Rodriquez School Counselor Kathy Pellas-Rehfield Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 5  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 12x682 School Name: Fannie Lou Hamer Freedom HS Superintendent: Kathy Pellas The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No (*Primary) * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Spanish Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral 6  3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. PTA meetings- every month Email blasts- 2x a month Post-cards- every month Hard copy Mailings - before school starts and when necessary 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide interpretation service(s)? 3 Parent - teacher nights 1 Curriculum night Advisors contact parents constantly 2 Parent Coordinators that make phone calls home and outreach. Parent Saturday school - Starting in Novemeber to end of school year. 7  3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) In first Curriculum night meeting and in parent teacher conferences- parents will be informed. Mailings before school starts. Parent coordinator outreach. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? Parent surveys. Outreach by Children's Aid Society Parent Coordinator Outreach by Fannie Lou Hamer Parent Coordinator. 8 
