2018-19 SCHOOL COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (SCEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 16K005 School Name: P.S. 005 DR. RONALD MCNAIR Principal: LENA GATES 2018-19 SCEP-P 1  School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) Section 4: SCEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Expanded Learning Time (ELT) Section 7: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 8: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 9: Title I Program Information Section 10: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 SCEP-P 2  Section 1: School Information Page School Information School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: School Number (DBN): 16K005 Dr. Ronald E. McNair 331600010005 3K, PreK– 5th grade & SE 12:1:1 820 Hancock Street, Brooklyn NY 11233 718-218-2444 718-218-2445 Phone Number: Kesha Townsel, A.P. Fax: ktownse@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: Email Address: Lena Gates Sheree' Choy Nadia Carter Brusseli CindiVan Petten SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Shauna McJunkin n/a n/a Geographical District: 16 Superintendent’s Office Address: District Information RaheshaAmon Superintendent: 1010 Lafayette Avenue, Room 135, Brooklyn NY 11221 RAmon@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718-574-2834 Phone Number: 7184531048 Fax: Brooklyn North FSC: Field Support Center (FSC) Executive Director: Bernadette Fitzgerald 2018-19 SCEP-P 3  Executive Director’s Office Address: Brooklyn North Borough Director – 131 Livingston Street, Brooklyn NY BFitzge2@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 718-935-3954 Phone Number: 718-935-2382 Fax: 2018-19 SCEP-P 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the SCEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Lena Gates Sheree' Choy Nadia Carter Darlene Graham Shauna McJunkin N/A N/A *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Charlotte Martin CBO Representative, if applicable Cindi Van Petten Shawndell Stewart Parent Staff/Chairperson Staff 2018-19 SCEP-P 5  Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Simone Goss Benoit Busseuil Donovan Lias n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a Parent Parent Parent Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ 2018-19 SCEP-P 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the School Comprehensive Educational Plan The School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) is a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. The process of developing and implementing the SCEP is aligned to the Framework for Great Schools. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding SCEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department has established programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students supports to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and SCEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint for continuous improvement that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to increase student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five (5) goals and action plans that align with 2018-19 SCEP-P 7  the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. Accountability Tools and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is informed by the New York State Education Department’s (NYSED) Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) Tenets, the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Rubric, School Quality Guide and other quantitative and qualitative data tools. NYSED’s Six DTSDE Tenets To strengthen the existing system, the NYSED has developed a tool that captures the best practices from each of the current tools called the Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness. This new tool encompasses multiple instruments such as interviews, classroom observations and surveys. The protocol will begin with a clear and cogent statement of the optimal conditions of an effective school and the instruments comprising the protocol will measure how close or far away a particular school is to the optimal conditions identified. Once reviewed, the school and district will create a strategic plan to address the areas in need of improvement. All current Priority and Focus Schools and Focus Districts must use the tool; districts that are required to submit District Comprehensive Improvement Plans and Comprehensive Educational Plans also will use the tool. The DTSDE protocol includes a rubric, which identifies clear and coherent expectations of the optimal conditions of an effective school and school district across the following six tenets:  Tenet 1: District Leadership and Capacity  Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions  Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support  Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions  Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health, and  Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The 2017-18 Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: 2018-19 SCEP-P 8  Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) I. II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Structures for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the SCEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the SCEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. Next Steps for SCEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: In Part 1A of the Section 5: Needs Assessment indicate the Statement of Practice (SOP) from the DTSDE Tenets that will be addressed in the action plan. Schools that received an Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) School Review should use the recommendations from the review to select their SOPs. Schools that did not undergo an IIT review should select SOPs informed by the major findings/recommendations from your most recent Quality Review (QR) or Central-led Review (CLR), and other qualitative and quantitative data.  Step 4: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you 2018-19 SCEP-P 9  monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 5: Build consensus around activities, strategies and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 6: Step 6: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 7: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 2018-19 SCEP-P 10  Section 4: SCEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? The Dr. Ronald E. McNair School affirms as its central mission that every child has the right to a quality education in a safe and secure environment which reflects high expectations and high academic standards; that “literacy” is the first and most essential goal; and that every child can, and will succeed in ways that mirror his or her aptitudes interests and culture. We wish to further indicate that P.S. 5 and its community will focus upon the attainment of the highest levels of academic achievement, interpersonal development, self-actualization and cultural awareness to ensure that each child will become a contributing member of his or her community, our nation, and the world of the 21st century. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. The Dr. Ronald E. McNair-Public School 5 is located in the Bedford Stuyvesant section of Brooklyn. It is an elementary school that services students from 3K, Pre-K to 5th grade. There are currently 218 students in attendance. African American students make up 81% of the school population. There are 14% Hispanic or Latino, 3% White and 0% Asian or Native American. 90% of the population is eligible for free lunch. The annual attendance rate per year is 91%. The teaching staff is 100% state certified. Out of the 218 students enrolled , 33.3% are classified as Students in Temporary Housing. There are 23.9% of students with disabilities and 8% of students that are classified as ELL's. The Dr. Ronald E. McNair-Public School 5 strives to provide students with the best education possible. For the school year 2017-2018 P.S. 5 has been identified as a priority school based on student achievement. P.S. 5 received a proficient rating in all areas of the 2015 -2016 school quality review. We continue to search out new methodologies that will assist us in improving instruction and meeting the needs of our students. The National Urban Alliance (NUA, Dr. Jackson) which addresses the development of their critical thinking skills for students, Materials for the Arts, Financial Literacy, Adelaide Sanford Learning Center Instructional activities, The Leader In Me Program, Teachers College Writing Program, Renzulli, School-Wide Enrichment Model,and student teachers from the Medgar Evers Pipeline Initiative that provides professional development for teachers are all methods used at P.S. 5 to enhance students’ outcomes in Reading, Writing and Math. The ideology of concentrating on both academic and social strengths to improve upon weakness in both areas has proved to be an asset to the instructional practice. Thinking Maps enrich curriculum. Students are practicing skills taught through thinking maps in all areas of study. Our Reso-A grant award has outfitted every class room with Promethean Boards and additional computer desk top and laptop carts. This program allows for the ELL population and the students with IEP's to work in small groups to enhance and develop ELA and Math skills through technology. Our strengths can be considered through the following implemented activities: Monday professional development, Increased teacher observations using the Danielson Framework, alignment of curriculum; use of Expeditionary Learning grade 3-5, Pre-K curriculum Core Knowledge K-2, Go Math curriculum, NTN, after-school program, Saturday School programs, NYC DOE Teacher Development Coach, the Robin Hood Library and the NY Public Library Program (MYLibrary). We have also considered the whole child and community in increasing student outcomes. The programmed day has also been modified to include a dance programs and an art program provided by Materials for the Arts. After-school activities also include Saturday chess club, boxing,track and cheerleading. Teachers teams have been developed by grade to address student and teacher needs. The school Inquiry team focuses on student data to improve the academic outcomes. Our MOSL team has been effective in choosing the measures of student learning for our building. Many new teams were developed to assist with improving the culture 2018-19 SCEP-P 11  and climate of the building. The Lighthouse Team, Student Lighthouse, Study Hall, 500 Men Making a Difference, Science Lab Initiative, Principal's Cabinet and School Leadership Team and a School-based Teacher Leadership Initiative have all been created to develop a range of ideas for students and community collaborations. This year our focus is on the improvement of our Math & ELA proficiency levels on our NY State exams. There was an increase in ELA scores by 28% and a slight decline in the math scores by 4%, on the NY State Assessments for 2018. We are focusing on instilling a greater consistency in instructional tasks that will include multiple entry points at high levels to address the instructional needs of all students in all grades. We will implement systems across all content areas to evaluate school-wide initiatives programs and policies in order to adjust practices among educators to ensure student achievement across all subject areas. P.S. 5 has developed the Adelaide L. Sanford Learning Center on the school site to assist with the improvement of student academic skills. High school students from the neighboring high schools provide math tutorial services under the direction of the Rock Academic Services Program. Students work with classroom teachers to identify the areas of weakness in math. Tutors then review the weaknesses in relationship to the Common Core Learning Standards. P.S. 5 have student teachers from Medgar Evers College and Metropolitan College who work with classroom teachers. P.S. 5 has received the 2017 School Innovation and Change Award from the National Principals Leadership Institute. We have also been awarded $810,000.00 form the Borough President, Eric Adams for a STEM program. P.S. 5 received an additional 215, 000. 00 grant to upgrade the school auditorium and technology. A state of the art STEM lab will be created to enhance student outcome in ELA and math. The 10,000 received will assist P.S. 5 in digging deeper into the inquiry process to assist us in moving the ELA and math scores. Grades 4 and 5 will participate in a program designed by P.S. 5 staff that will allow students to receive instruction in math and science on the Medgar Evers College campus weekly. Experts in these fields will assist teachers with content information. P.S. 5 teachers will conduct lessons. Student teachers from the university will participate in this initiative. Grades 4 and 5 are also participants in the Medgar Evers Pipeline Initiative. Student take math, science and technology classes on the university campus weekly. Students are instructed by the Deans, Professors and interns of the school. Teachers are able to view content development and instructional practices as they participate in lessons with their students. The Jump Math program has been added to assist students with the basic skills as it pertains to the common core learning standards. This program is present in the after-school venue. The school has received a literacy coach who will concentrate on the early childhood program. We have increased the math coach's time spent with P.S. 5 from a two week cycle to a once a week cycle. Professional development for teachers is included in this cycle. Teachers have 24 hour support from the math coach. 2018-19 SCEP-P 12  3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. Students with IEP's continue to be a focus for improvement along with the students who fall into the lowest quartile in ELA and math. To this end, we have implemented several new initiatives to assist with academic improvement. Jump Math is a program that scaffolds the intended instruction of specific math skills. This program will take place in the after-school time period. Reading Rescue is designed for students in the lower grades with reading skills. Paraprofessionals are trained to work with students to move their reading levels Tutor Mate is a program designed to enhance early literacy skills. The after-school tutorial programs, U Rock Math and ThinkCerca all provide additional remediation and support for students. We are piloting Fast Track, a program designed to meet the academic needs of students with disabilities. We are also sending several special education teachers to the Orton Guillingham training to develop strategies to assist them with daily instruction. P.S. 5 has the highest population of students in transitional housing in the district. Students move in and out of the school community based on the family status of housing. This creates a problem when it comes to sustainability in student instructional progress levels. There is a shift in student enrollment every school year. This impacts State ELA and Math data yearly. We have enhanced the activities of the Attendance Committee to include incentives to motivate students and families to improve attendance. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. During the school year 2017-2018 we have increased the partnerships that will have an impact on student learning. P.S. 5 has become a CARP school. Several teachers are researching the current instructional practices and student populations that need improvement. We have identified our special needs population and ELA for all grades. The School-based Teacher leaders program empowered teachers. Teachers were able to support each other as they begin to work toward improving instruction. The Showcase Implementation Grant was awarded. The School-base Teacher Leaders are working toward implementing a research-based instructional ELA model as a showcase endeavor. Based on the decline in math scores on the NY State Assessment P.S. 5 is working toward identifying instructional strengths in teacher pedagogy. There will be a greater emphasis on early childhood students. We have added two 3K classes to the school. Teachers have been hired that have the specialty early childhood license. These teachers have been trained to work with students in grades 3K, Pre-K through 2. Our goal is to begin to send students to grade 3 with increased academic and social emotional skills. The Jump Math program will assist students with building their skill knowledge. There is a weekly coach that is assisting in monitoring progress with the Jump Math program with the supervisors. Saturday tutorial programs will begin earlier this year. We will begin in November 2018. A STEM program will begin on Saturday which will also enhance math skills for students in grades 3-5. The Medgar Evers Pipeline Initiative will support math instruction for students in grades 4 and 5. The U Rock Math Program (High School Tutors) will increase to service more students. Several students were very close to receiving a level 3 on the math state assessment. With additional support, these students should show gains for the new school year. 2018-19 SCEP-P 13  We will focus on building writing skills and math skills to improve student outcomes. Math scores on the State assessment fell from 40% in 2017 to 36% in 2018. The Framework for Great Schools sites Rigorous Instruction as a means to creating more effective schools. P.S. 5 continues to utilize Expeditionary Learning, Teacher's College Writing program and Go math as its instructional materials to promote higher level instruction in all classrooms. For the school year 2018-2019 teachers will focus on the identified curriculum on;y. The common core for learning standards will drive the instructional practices. Curriculum will be used to demonstrate achievement of the standards in all subject areas. Coaches have been added in ELA and math that will assist teachers in development of rigorous instructional practices. The Leader in Me initiative will support development of a safe climate. An online system of student accountability has been developed to track student and family needs. All staff will have access to the online document. entries will be available to the staff. Friday leadership assemblies will highlight positive student behavior and student leadership skills. Teachers will continue to receive information and training during the Friday leadership assemblies. Staff members are also being trained in restorative practices to support social emotional growth. A group of teachers and supervisors are engaged in an online course at Harvard University which assist with the school's instructional focus, "Making Thinking Visible." Professional development activities will move this work through the building. The leadership structure will be strengthened to push the overall instructional practices of the school. School leaders will put a larger emphasis on the instructional cabinet. The instructional cabinet will analyze and make recommendations to improve identified areas needing support. This school year the instructional cabinet has identified writing as an area of concern. A writing cluster has been adopted to support this area of need. Math instructional practice is also a school priority. Parent participation has increased tremendously. We are continuing to improve the school in this area. The parent coordinator has been assigned to collect parent logs monthly for review. Parent logs have been placed in all classrooms. School leaders collect and monitor the outreach and the outcomes. Special events have been developed to increase parent participation. Leadership assembly days include awards for students and parents. Student leadership conferences bring parents into the school experience. We are working to improve the Trust component of the Framework for Good Schools. Weekly morning breakfasts have been added for staff conversations or support. Staff members meet with school leaders before the start of the school day to receive assistance with academic or other concerns. School leaders are present to help in all areas of the school. There is an open door policy for all staff. Parents also have daily access to school leaders. The improvement process is in place. We are working on mechanisms to sustain the school's progress from year to year. P.S. 5 received the National School Change Award for 2017 from the National Principal's Institute. this award 2018-19 SCEP-P 14  also afforded the school monies to build sustainability into the school improvement process. We were also awarded $810,000.00 form the Borough President to implement programs that will improve the overall school academic and social environment. A new STEM Lab is in place as well as one to one laptops for students. A parent technology lab has been developed. 2018-19 SCEP-P 15  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 16K005 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration PK,0K,01,02,03,04,05 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 208 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 27 27 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 33 31 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 89.0% % Attendance Rate 85.1% % Reduced Lunch 2.4% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.5% 13.0% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 2.9% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 16.97 0% 0% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 47.0% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 70% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No No Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District Yes Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A N/A N/A N/A NO Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A YES High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 16 20 87.4% 3.4% 30.8% 83.2% 0.0% 1.0% 2 20% 6.9 35.3% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No NO N/A N/A N/A NO NO N/A N/A N/A NO YES N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 SCEP-P 16  2018-19 SCEP-P 17  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 3 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 3.2 The school leader ensures and supports the quality implementation of a systematic plan of rigorous and coherent curricula appropriately aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS) that is monitored and adapted to meet the needs of students. Teachers develop and ensure that unit and lesson plans used include data-driven instruction (DDI) protocols that are appropriately aligned to the CCLS and NYS content standards and address student achievement needs. The school leader and teachers have developed a comprehensive plan for teachers to partner within and across all grades and subjects to create interdisciplinary curricula targeting the arts, technology, and other enrichment opportunities. Teachers implement a comprehensive system for using formative and summative assessments for strategic short and long-range curriculum planning that involves student reflection, tracking of, and ownership of learning. 3.3 3.4 3.5 SOP(s) Addressed x x x x Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Based on the 2015-2016 Quality Review the school engages in rigorous instruction throughout the instructional day. The 2015-2016 Quality Review states that curricular documents reflect common core learning standards and the integration of the instructional shifts. Curricular and academic tasks are planned and refined based on student work and data. The Quality Review from 2015-2016 also states that all students, including English Language Learners and students with disabilities, have access to curricular and tasks that are cognitively engaging and promote college and career readiness. Across classrooms, assessment practices are aligned with the school's curricula and consistently reflect the use of ongoing checks for understanding and student self-assessment. Students use feedback forms, created by teachers, along with student and teacher made rubrics aligned to the common core learning standards to promote higher levels of academic engagement and assessment. Peer feedback collaboration takes place in grades 1-5. 2018-19 SCEP-P 18  The curriculum is integrated with art, music and drama. Materials for the Arts work with teachers to assist them with curriculum study, research and higher level cognitive activities. Students created a Native American Museum, a corridor display of the solar system and a corridor display of the Rainforest. Across classrooms, teaching practices reflect a consistent commitment to ability based grouping and student discussion that are informed by the Danielson Framework and the instructional shifts. Student ELA scores for 2018 increased from 25% to 48%. Math scores for 2018 declined from 40% to 36% . We were motivated to have 95% or more of our students participate in the State assessment. We accomplished this goal. Informed by the Principal Performance Review there was a need to develop a more strategic, targeted intervention and re-teach strategy that will impact student achievement. There is also a need to focus on the level of tasks given during instruction to promote a higher cognitive challenge for students. The 2018 Principal's Performance Review stated that the students are engaged in rigorous coherent content in all subject areas that is aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards. The PPO also states that the school has modified the units of study to align with social studies and science to support writing across content areas and the incorporation of the instructional shifts. Informed by the Capacity Framework Element-Rigorous Instruction, current data and the most recent Quality Review, there is a need to refine the use of strategies that provide scaffolds and multiple entry points. This need assessment informed the development of the goal listed below. Informed by the decline in the NY State Assessments there is need to build the inquiry process and procedures to include the students in the early grades. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June of 2019, 85% of teachers will implement and make progress toward instructional strategies that will provide multiple entry points and challenging tasks that demonstrate higher-order thinking that will result in a 5% increase of students scoring levels 3 and 4 as measured by the school-based math assessment. 2018-19 SCEP-P 19  2018-19 SCEP-P 20 Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) September - 2018 May 2019 Monthly Team and Teacher meetings Administration & Teacher Teams, Inquiry Team, U Rock Math Tutor Program, DOE Support Staff, Teacher Leaders Students Level 1 &2 for interventions such as After-school programs and students scoring 2,3, and 4 for tutoring assistance. Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Teachers will review and analyze the data from the 2016-2017 NYS Common Core math assessment. This review is used to review strengths and weaknesses of students in grades 2, 3,4 and 5. Students are then grouped and tracked for consistent improvement in math. Teacher professional development will be geared toward identified instructional weaknesses. Students will be identified to work with additional programs to support learning. A bi-monthly school-wide assessment process will track specific skills of all students by use of the item skills analysis. Teachers will meet in the data room, where the information from the bi-monthly assessments are housed, to make informed decisions about the next steps for students. Teachers will also use other forms of assessments such as benchmarks, teacher created assessments, writing samples and curriculum based assessments to determine student individual needs. Instructional practices will be developed to meet the needs of all students. Technology (computers, the Promethean Boards) will be used to provide remediation for students. Enrichment activities such as developing tasks, or group work, will be given to students who have mastered the skill. Remediation and enrichment is also offered in the U Rock after-school program. Teachers will provide opportunities for students to work with other classes (departmentalization) Additional Activities: Push In//Pull Out Program - Support Staff will push in to assist with providing additional instructional support to identified students 2018-19 SCEP-P 21  Study Hall - Three times a week identified student will engage in a peer to peer study session during a scheduled time of day Saturday Academy will provide 4 hours of weekly remediation Math Daily Trivia - Students will answer word problems that have been reviewed by the class and students Upper Grade Tutors - Upper grade students will assist the lower grade with math skills Monthly Math Tournament- Students in grades 3-5 Collaboration with Medgar Evers Math Professors - Grade 4 and 5 will meet weekly with a college professor from the university to enhance math instruction Student Leadership Binders - Weekly monitoring of student math skills and class assessments National Training Network- Increase math professional development from bi - weekly to weekly Identify the key math focus standards. Minimize the number of common core math standards for instruction and mastery. Students Grades 2-5 The Key math standards have been identified by the State of New York. The instruction given places a heavy emphasis on the identified standards. (Major Clusters) Administration and Teacher Teams. Inquiry Team, Teacher Leaders September 2018- ( the feedback form process will begin) December 2018 2018-19 SCEP-P 22  Tri-fold student feedback forms offer students the opportunity to share their work, have conversations and assist students(SWD, ELL) with completion and understanding of the tasks. Rubrics are created and used by students. Students use the rubrics to begin dialogue about their tasks. Review the math curriculum, Go Math and the State Math Modules and aligned them to the major clusters highlighted in the NYS common Core math assessment. Teachers create instructional lessons based on the identification of the major clusters Teachers will administer the Common Core Baseline Assessment in October and monthly common core aligned school-wide assessments for math. Monitoring of students with disabilities, ELL’s and a targeted group of students in grades 3-5 will be highlighted for progress. The school-wide Special Education Team will meet monthly to review the resuklts of the school-wide assessments. Activities will be planned to support students with special needs such as push in assistance from the school-based support team, push in support from the SETTS teacher and the adoption of the Jump Math program.. The Principal and Assistant Principal will continue their switch in supervisory responsibilities, so that the principal oversees the early childhood grades, pre-kindergarten through grade two, and the assistant principal oversees the upper grades, grades three through five. This will place greater emphasis on early childhood education in the school. (Review of Impact) Administration, Data Analyst, Teachers Classroom Teachers, SETTS, ESL Teacher All Teachers September- 2018 December 2019 All students October 2018- December After December 2018, there will be a review for continuation. Grades Pre-K-5 September 2018-June 2019 : Principal & AP Student- Led-Conferences will give students the opportunity to share their data and learning with their parents. Students speak about what they have been told to help them get to the next level. Parents also have the opportunity to identify areas that they will assist in. Student K-5, Parents, Staff October 2018-May 2019 (Bi-Monthly) Parents, Staff, Administrators NA 3b – Parent and Family Engagement NA NA NA How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. The Dr. Ronald E. McNair School/P.S. 5 has adopted Student Leadership Binders and Student-Led Conferences that engage families. Families will meet bi-monthly to review student data and social emotional growth. Feedback is shared by students and teachers that parents can use to support their children at home. Weekly meetings with 2018-19 SCEP-P 23  parents are scheduled every Tuesday for additional parental information regarding student outcome. Classroom teachers are available to meet with parents. This will begin in September 2018 and end in June 2019. Class DoJo is used by teachers to provide parents with immediate feedback involving student outcomes. Classroom teachers and parents who have given consent will engage in this activity. The school also provides weekly progress reports. There are 50% of teachers using the progress reports. The weekly progress reports give parents a weekly update on student performance along with suggestions to support students at home. School-based Teacher Leaders, Principal, Assistant Principal and classroom teachers are responsible for implementation. Parent Coordinator and PTA assist in setting up conferences. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Teacher training, per session pay, instructional materials. Saturday Academy, Saturday professional development for staff, Use of teacher teams, peers, administration for demonstration of modeling, developing norms and a common language among teachers and students in the implementations of the math curriculum development of assessments and analysis of data for math grades 3-5. Go-Math technology benchmark assessments to monitor student progress. Inter-visitations, teacher team meetings and 5 common prep periods, weekly will allow for planning on professional developments. Monday and Tuesday professional development activities and Deviation PD 360 foster teacher collaborations Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century C4E School Achievement X Other Funding Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, there will be a 5% increase in students scoring level 3 & 4 on the school-wide common core math assessment based on the additional supports provided by National Training Network (NTN), the U Rock Math Tutorial Program and the Jump Math Program. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. The school-wide monthly assessments, Student Leadership Binders, MOSL (Measures of Student Learning), Prior NYS Assessments will be used to assess progress along with teacher made assessments. Teachers will utilize the school-wide monthly assessments, MOSL, and prior NYS assessments to make informed decisions during their inquiry meeting. New protocols will be developed to adjust teacher learning. These protocols will create a systemic way of looking and analyzing student data. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-P 24  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 5 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 5.2 The school leader establishes overarching systems and understandings of how to support and sustain student social and emotional developmental health and academic success. 5.3 The school articulates and systematically promotes a vision for social and emotional developmental health that is aligned to a curriculum or program that provides learning experiences and a safe and healthy school environment for families, teachers, and students. 5.4 All school stakeholders work together to develop a common understanding of the importance of their contributions in creating a school community that is safe, conducive to learning, and fostering of a sense of ownership for providing social and emotional developmental health supports tied to the school’s vision. 5.5 The school leader and student support staff work together with teachers to establish structures to support the use of data to respond to student social and emotional developmental health needs. x x x x SOP(s) Addressed Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? Supportive Environment- a school culture where student feel safe, supported and challenged by their teachers and peers; and are engaged in ambitious intellectual activity. The School Quality Review for 2015-2016 the school received a Proficient rating for QR indicator 1.4, maintaining a culture of mutual trust and positive attitudes that supports the academic and personal growth of students and adults. The school also received a Proficient rating for QR indicator 3.4, establishing a culture for learning that communicates high expectations to staff, students and families, and provides supports to achieve those expectations. The QR also states that the school has adopted various initiatives such as the “Leader in Me” to create positive and respectful school culture. Teachers receive training that focuses on the seven habits of effective leadership and opportunities that promote student leadership such as student led Town Hall Meetings, student- led conferences and 2018-19 SCEP-P 25  student government. The report from the School Quality Review states students and parents express that they are feel safe and respected in school. Informed by Framework Element-Supportive Environment, current data and the most recent Quality Review, there is a need to establish a systematic unified set of high expectations for students and provide clear, focused, and effective feedback and guidance, including subgroups, which will have students own their educational experience that will prepare them for the next level. This needs assessment informed the development of the annual goal listed below. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools –Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June of 2019, we will reduce the number of students who miss more than five days of school during the Fall and Spring semesters by adding additional attendance monitoring and initiatives that will result in an 5% increase of student attendance as compare to 2017-2018 school year where there was no change in student attendance. 2018-19 SCEP-P 26  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). A new attendance team will be developed to include teachers and other school support personnel. The attendance team will assess student attendance and lateness for the school year 2017-2018 set up a monitoring system for the students. All families will receive reminder letters about the importance of daily attendance.Weekly attendance meetings will be conducted. ATS weekly reports will assist with monitoring of student attendance. Weekly attendance meetings will allow time to review student attendance and plan for improvement. Students whose attendance is below 95%. September 2018-June 2019 Teachers will continue to receive training for the Leader In Me Initiative to assist students with building confidence and leadership skills. Students having school leadership roles tend to come to school regularly and on time Students whose attendance is below 95% September 2018-June 2019 Student-Led award assemblies will be held to highlight attendance improvement as well as students who have perfect attendance. PTA meeting awards adding attendance to calendars. All students September 2018-2019 "All stakeholders will gather relevant data and develop a shared online spreadsheet to record all student disciplinary and clinical referrals, the interventions and services provided, and the impact on student behavior. This data will be analyzed monthly to coordinate services, determine the effectiveness of interventions and will be adjusted as necessary." All Students November 2018-June 2019 Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Guidance Counselor, School Based Support Team, school Pupil Accounting Secretary, Family Assistant, Teachers & Administrator, Mental Health Coordinator Guidance Counselor, School Based Support Team, school Pupil Accounting Secretary, Family Assistant, Teachers & Administrator, Lighthouse team/ classroom teacher Guidance Counselor, School Based Support Team, school Pupil Accounting Secretary, Family Assistant, Teachers & Administrator Student Support Team Services Team NA NA NA NA 2018-19 SCEP-P 27  3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. The attendance teacher will send daily post card to parents when students are absent from school from September 2018 - June 2019.. The attendance team will create a plan that will outline the process for monitoring student attendance.this will take place in September 2018. The attendance team will meet monthly to review student attendance. Daily phone calls will be made by the school pupil personnel secretary and other school personnel in the event of student absences. School created documents will be given to parent during Bi-monthly Student -led -Conferences to remind parents of the importance of attendance. Parent awards will be given along with student awards to promote daily attendance. School bus service will be offered to parents living outside of the borough and within a certain distance of the school so that students will have daily transportation to school. The parent coordinator will provide assistance in making phone calls before the start of school to assist with getting students to school. School uniforms are available to assist with clothing. Breakfast is also available for all students. Meetings with the school attendance teacher will take place before meetings with the supervisors. Parents will have an opportunity to explain what is happening. the attendance teacher will offer supports that are available within the Department of Education and community based options. If attendance issues persist the supervisors will meet with parents. This meeting will also allow parents to explain the issues that cause the concern. Supervisors will also offer support to assist parents. Parents will be made aware of Chancellor's Regulations and other possible agencies that should be notified if the attendance problem continues. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Attendance team, teachers, guidance counselors, family workers and Parent Coordinator will assist with implementation of attendance planning. Use of Leader In me professional development and teacher training to increase student attendance and engagement. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century C4E School Achievement X Other Funding Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, there will be a 5% increase in student attendance as measured by the January ATS (RISA) & (RCUA) reports in comparison to the previous year. 2018-19 SCEP-P 28  Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. The instrument of measure will be student ATS accounting. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-P 29  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 4 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 4.2 School and teacher leaders ensure that instructional practices and strategies are organized around annual, unit, and daily lesson plans that address all student goals and needs. 4.3 Teachers provide coherent, and appropriately aligned Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS)-based instruction that leads to multiple points of access for all students. 4.4 Teachers and students work together to implement a program/plan to create a learning environment that is responsive to students’ varied experiences and tailored to the strengths and needs of all students. SOP(s) Addressed x x x 4.5 Teachers inform planning and foster student participation in their own learning process by using a variety of summative and formative data sources (e.g., screening, interim measures, and progress monitoring). Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. x 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. The Principal's Performance Review measure of leadership Practice SY 2017 -2018 states that the majority of teachers are engaged in structured, professional collaborations on teacher teams that will promote the achievement of the school-wide goals. The teams consistently analyze student data and student work and use data to design student intervention groups. the teacher team meetings are facilitated by teachers and use structured protocols for looking at student work. The Quality Review for 2015-2016 states that the professional collaborations within the school is the beginning to strengthen teacher capacity and the support of the common core learning standards. The majority of the teachers are engaged in structured inquiry-based professional collaborations. Informed by the Principal's Performance Review, to continue refining instruction, strategies should be set up to implement professional learning cycles to help teachers improve their practices in Danielson Framework Component 3 (Instruction). The Quality Review 2015-2016 states that distributive leadership structures are in place but need to be embedded throughout the school. Teachers should begin to play a more integral role in key decision making that affect student learning across the school. A school-based teacher leadership initiative has been developed to address the concerns about distributive leadership and teacher professional learning cycles. P.S. 5 also has a peer Collaborative teacher that continues to work with teachers to enhance their professional development and leadership skills. 2018-19 SCEP-P 30  Informed by the Capacity Framework Element-Collaborative Teachers the 2017-2018 Principal Performance Review states that although teachers sit on teams and there is some evidence of instructional improvements there is a need to develop an early grade model classroom and learning partnership with a school who has strong early learning classrooms will support the improvement efforts. The IIT review states that early childhood teachers should continue to have vertical team meetings to support their instructional practices. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June of 2019 90% of students will use thinking routines that will improve their ELA performance by one level based on collaboration of teacher teams and inter-visitation models of professional development as evidenced by student work samples compared to essay writing in 2018. 2018-19 SCEP-P 31  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Teachers will analyze student data from school-wide and NYS Common Core ELA and math assessments. Teacher Team Meetings will support this inquiry. The teams will review school-wide assessments and assessment materials developed for review by the team, such as writing samples and math problem solving that requires explanations of their math work. Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) All Teachers September 2018-June 2019 Data Analyst, Administration, Teacher Teams Teacher Teams will analyze current curriculum for possible change or revision. For example. Jump Math is an addition to assist with basic math skills as identified by the teacher teams as a need. Teachers A professional development committee will be developed. They will develop their meeting schedule. A professional development plan will be created and submitted to the administration. Teachers Every Monday will be designated for professional development activities. Teacher teams and differentiated professional development models will take place at this time. Teachers will work with their teacher leaders. Monday will be designated for group presentations of the month long learning. Teachers September 2018-June 2019 September 2018-June 2019 September 2018-June 2019 Data Analyst, Administration, Teacher Teams Professional Development Committee, Administration Professional Development Committee, Administration Monthly Unit Plans will indicate teacher collaboration. CARP meeting agendas and meetings will indicate collaborations. The new Literacy Coach will share weekly logs with supervisors. Teacher Team Meeting minutes and agendas are collected. Teachers September 2018-June 2019 Administration School-Based Teacher Leaders 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. The Dr. Ronald E. McNair/P.S. 5 staff will implement several parent workshops that will highlight teacher professional learning such as strategies to assist students with development of comprehension skills. Teachers will work with the Peer Collaborative teacher in developing a strategy to use for building comprehension. the document created will be shared with parents in a workshop environment. Parent will be able to use the same document at home. This process will be yearlong. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment 2018-19 SCEP-P 32  Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Edivation PD/360, Teacher's College substitutes to cover classes, Instructional workshops, Professional Development Academy Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, 3% of student writing levels will increase by one level in comparison to baseline assessments given in September 2018. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. School-wide bi-monthly writing assessments will be used to assess progress. Assessments will be teacher-made and past ELA part 3 written tasks will be used. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-P 33  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 2 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 2.2 The school leader ensures that the school community shares the Specific, Measurable, Ambitious, Results-oriented, and Timely (SMART) goals/mission and long-term vision inclusive of core values that address the priorities outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP). Leaders make strategic decisions to organize programmatic, human, and fiscal capital resources. 2.3 2.4 The school leader has a fully functional system in place aligned to the district's Annual Professional Performance Review (APPR) to conduct targeted and frequent observation and track progress of teacher practices based on student data and feedback. 2.5 Leaders effectively use evidence-based systems and structures to examine and improve critical individual and school-wide practices as defined in the SCEP (student achievement, curriculum and teacher practices; leadership development; community/family engagement; and student social and emotional developmental health). x x x x SOP(s) Addressed Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Effective School Leadership The 2015-2016 Quality Review state that the Principal has made organizational decisions to support school-wide goals that will increase student achievement. it states that the school leader consistently communicates high expectations that are aligned with the Danielson framework for Teaching and provides training to the entire staff. Staff members consistently communicate expectations connected to a path of college readiness and offer ongoing feedback of student progress to families. A teacher at P.S. 5 was selected as a Peer-Collaborative Teacher. Her expertise will enhance the level of teacher practice in the building. the enhancement of teacher practice will result in increased student outcomes. The Peer-Collaborative Teacher provides demonstration lesson od effective instructional practices and works with improving the quality of the 2018-19 SCEP-P 34  teacher teams. The Peer-Collaborative Teacher engages the staff in professional development activities which have been identified as a focus area for the school. Teacher teams meet weekly during school hours to share best practices and review student data and work. Teachers have developed tools that are shared school-wide. Baseline and teacher assessments are developed and reviewed for implementation. Based on the results from the 2014-2015 ELA and math NYS assessments the principal has made effective adjustments to increase the quality of instruction so that all students meet the expectations of the CCLS. This is stated in the Principal's Performance Review, Measures of Leadership Practice, SY 2015-2016. A partnership with Teacher's College, to assist with the development of a writing curriculum helped students write with sophistication and complexity. teacher teams analyzed student writing by class and individual student. Effective feedback is provided to teachers verbally and written through formal and informal walk-throughs using the Danielson Framework for Teaching to inform teachers of their performance. Informed by the Principal's Performance review the school needs to continue refining the use of learning cycles to help teachers improve their practice in Danielson 3C. The IIT review for the 2016-2017 stated that based on the the needs to improve instruction and supervise curriculum in the lower grades the assistant principal and principal should switch assignments to place greater emphasis on the early childhood. The principal will supervise early childhood. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART– Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June of 2019, 80% of teachers will receive timely(within 48 hours) and effective written feedback by the use of the Danielson Framework for Teaching and Learning tool. 2018-19 SCEP-P 35  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) ll teachers will receive additional assistance in understanding the Danielson Framework for Effective Teaching. All feedback will be given to teachers, verbally and/or written within 15 days of the instructional observation NYDOE provides additional training on-site for teachers. Teachers, Grades PreK-5 September 2018-June 2019 Administration , Teacher Leaders & Consultants Systems for monitoring student progress will be improved by creating schedules and calendars for assessments and material due dates. Students grades 3-5 The high school mentoring program will be developed to assist students with math skills. Students grades 4 & 5 The Adelaide Sanford Learning Center will be developed to assist students with academic needs. Students with disabilities and ELL students will benefit deeply from activities developed in the learning center. A deep focus on student strengths and weakness will be the basis for the small group instruction. Students will receive appointment schedules. Parent will be able to meet with tutors and teachers of the learning center. Pacing Calendars and schedules will be developed to ensure deep work in the instructional areas. Materials for the Arts and a creative dance program enhance the school instructional environment. he school-based after-school program and Saturday program will be developed to address student deficiencies. School leaders will send written notification of meetings to discuss observations. School leaders will leave post it notes after classroom visits with written feedback. Weekly data chats will give teachers an opportunity to receive feedback. The scheduling will allow teachers to meet with supervisors weekly for indiviual professional development and feedback. September 2018-June 2019 September 2018-June 2019 September 2018-June 2019 Administration , Teacher Leaders, & Consultants Administration, Rock Inc. and Consultants Administration , Teacher Leaders, high school tutors& Classroom Teachers Students below level 2 in ELA & Math. Teachers PreK through 5th grade. September 2018- June 2019 Teachers and Students grades 4 & 5 October 2017-June 2018 Students below level 2 in ELA & Math Teachers October 2018-April 2010 September 2018 - June 2019 Teacher Leader & Administration Staff & Materials for the Arts Teachers & Administration Administration 2018-19 SCEP-P 36  3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. P/S. 5 has developed a Parent Leadership Society to empower parents to navigate the education system and keep abreast of school updates. This will continue for the school year 2018-2019. Dr. Angela Moses will lead the group. The Parent Leadership Society will meet monthly beginning in September of 2018 and ending in June of 2019. The leadership in the building will attend the monthly meetings to share information needed to support their children at home. Trained parents from the parent leadership Society will volunteer to assist in the school building demonstrating learned leadership skills. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. The Danielson Framework and Advance system for teacher evaluation and student progress. Teachers Consultants, books and materials, per session for staff. Inter and Intra visitations to schools and classrooms. Edivation PD 360 will be used as additional feedback source for teachers. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century C4E School Achievement X Other Funding Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, there will be at least a 3% increase in ELA & Math scores measured by monthly teacher meetings with leadership to review student outcomes measured by the data from school-wide assessments in ELA and math. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Past ELA and math state assessment will be used. Teacher made assessments will also be used on a bi-monthly basis. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-P 37  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 6 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 6.2 The school leader ensures that regular communication with students and families fosters their high expectations for student academic achievement. 6.3 The school engages in effective planning and reciprocal communication with family and community stakeholders so that student strength and needs are identified and used to augment learning. 6.4 The school community partners with families and community agencies to promote and provide training across all areas (academic and social and emotional developmental health) to support student success. 6.5 The school shares data in a way that promotes dialogue among parents, students, and school community members centered on student learning and success and encourages and empowers families to understand and use data to advocate for appropriate support services for their children. x x x x SOP(s) Addressed Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Strong Family and Community Ties The 2015-2016 Quality Review states that parents feel that the school communicates with them regarding their children's progress in school. Specifically, they mentioned communication during the Tuesday parent conferences and the online platforms that updates them on projects, assignments, grades and events. In addition, some teachers forward math websites to parents that they say support their children's learning at home. Dr. Ronald E. McNair/P.S. 5 has adopted bi-monthly Student Led Conferences to also keep parents and students aware of their academic progress. Students meet with their parents to share their monthly progress. Students have developed 2018-19 SCEP-P 38  Student leadership Binders that include their personal data, celebrations, goals for the month and information from their teachers about how to improve. This is shared with the parents. Based on the Quality Review, Strong Family Ties received a 3.70 out of 4.0 rating. The school has also created a large support of partnerships that enhance school and student needs. many of the partnerships have enhance student outcomes.  500 Men making A Difference - Provide STEM activities to students during the school year including the summer months Several Community Churches - Provide books, materials, fund projects,space   Adelaide L. Sanford Institute - Art shows, professional development for teachers, monthly parent institute  Materials for the Art - Art instruction for students, professional development for teachers  National Training Network (NTN) - Provides professional development in math for teachers, demonstration lessons for teachers and planning support School Improvement Network - Online professional development, teacher support  Poly Tech University - Robotics   Teacher's College Writing Project - Writing program  Rock Academic Services - Provides high school math tutors to work with students in the Adelaide Sanford Learning Center  Practice Makes Perfect  Franklin Covey Institute - The Leader In Me Initiative (Social and Emotional Development) Based on attendance during the Tuesday Parent Conferences and Student- Led Conferences there is a need to increase the number of parents attending these events to review student academic progress. There is also a need to increase the parent's use of technology to monitor student progress. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June of 2019, parent attendance sheets will demonstrate a 3% increase in parent participation from 43% to 46% at parent conferences, programs and performances as compared to the 2017-18 academic school year parent attendance documentation.. 2018-19 SCEP-P 39  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Student-Led conferences will be increased from 2 per year to bi- monthly . These conferences will be held to highlight the specific curriculum areas. Parents and students Additional sessions of viewing class instruction will be added. The parent leadership Society will invite teachers and staff to their meetings to speak about instructional practices. Teacher, Parents The school leadership team will engage in a district training this school year. Additional school-based, network and district support will be added. The parent room will be open throughout the school day and on Saturday. Parents of dance students and Saturday School students will have an opportunity to be engaged in activities on Saturday. The Parent Leadership Society will prepare parents for leadership roles in the classroom. Increase the number of parent workshops throughout the school year to include, technology, common core, Math and ELA. Administration, Parents, Teachers, School Leadership Team Parents And students Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) September 2018-June 2019 September 2018- June 2019 September 2018-June 2019 Teachers Administration, Parent Coordinators Teachers, Administration, Parent Coordinator, Dr. Moses, Consultant Teachers, Administration, Parent Coordinators and Parents September 2018- June 2019 PTA President, PTA Consultan, Dr. Moses Parents, teachers, students September 2018- June 2019 Teachers Administration, Parent Coordinator, Parent Student awards will be given during PTA conferences to improve the attendance. Students & Parents September 2018- June 2019 Teachers, Administration, Parent Coordinators "School leaders will frequently review teachers' parent outreach logs to evaluate the extent and type of teachers' outreach efforts, and provide appropriate support as needed." Teachers November 2018-June 2019 School Leaders NA 3b – Parent and Family Engagement NA NA NA If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-P 40  P.S. 5 has partnered with the following community-based organizations: Antioch Baptist Church, Friendship Baptist Church, Universal Baptist Church, Janes United Methodist Church, National Association for Black School Educators, Adelaide Sanford Institute, Chionesu Barkari Boys Mentoring Program, 500 Men Making A Difference, U Rock Math Program,Bedford Stuyvesant Early Childhood Development Learning Center, AHtram Construction, Stuy Park Lion's Club International,Family Dynamics, No Gunsmoke Inc.,Neighborhood Chess Group, Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Purchase of new Poster Maker to assist in communication to parents & Community Additional student-led Conferences geared toward student progress and accountability. Purchase of materials for parent participation Teacher-Teams meetings in preparation for parents viewing instructional lessons. 5 common prep periods to allow for teacher team meetings. Increase the number of activities for parents and students Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century C4E School Achievement X Other Funding Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2018 there will be a 3% increase in parent, school-wide participation from 38% of parents attending parent monthly;y meetings Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Attendance sheets from monthly school-wide conferences and parent teacher meetings will be used to measure the growth of parent participation. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-P 41  Section 6: Expanded Learning Time (ELT) Program Description Directions: Expanded Learning Time activities are directly aligned to the elements of the Framework for Great Schools, Rigorous Instruction, Supportive Environment, and Strong Family and Community Ties. ELT provides enriching educational experiences that happen outside of the traditional school day and blend skill acquisition, relationship-building and fun to foster academic and social-emotional growth. Summer learning, afterschool programming, and extended-day ELT models, when well-implemented, play a critical role in supporting students in all grades and ensuring that they graduate from high school, college and career ready. SED requires that Priority schools offer a minimum of 200 additional student contact hours as Expanded Learning Time in addition to the current mandated length of 900 hours of instruction per year (25 hours per week) in grades K-6 and 990 hours of instruction per year (27.5 hours per week) in grades 7-12. Effective ELT models will blend school staff with community partners, and will provide a balanced curriculum that can include ELA, Math, STEM, arts, physical activity, and leadership development. Complete the sections on this page to demonstrate how the school will meet these requirements. Part 1 – ELT Program Goal(s) Describe the summative goal(s) of the ELT program for the 2018-19 school year. Be sure to construct the goal to be SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Realistic, and Time-bound. Student ELA and math levels on the school-wide assessments will increase by one level based on the support from the high school tutor program, after-school program and Saturday School Academy by June of 2018. Student ELA and math scores will increase by one level based on the increase of one hour iof the school day for students in grades 3-5 by June or 2018 as measured by school - base assessments. Part 2 – ELT Program Type Is the ELT program voluntary or compulsory? X Voluntary Compulsory If the ELT program is voluntary, indicate how you will actively encourage the participation of all students, with the goal of serving at least 50% of students. A school-wide bookstore has been developed for students to purchase items of interest with the use of Dr. Ronald E. McNair Bucks. Participation in the voluntary support programs will afford students additional Dr. Ronald E. McNair bucks to be used in the school bookstore. Part 3 – ELT Program Description The ELT program will be offered to all students eligible for Academic Intervention Services (AIS), with the goal of serving a minimum of fifty percent of AIS-eligible students. Describe how the school will meet the following SED requirements for an ELT program in a Priority School:  Integrate academics, enrichment, and skill development through hands-on experiences that make learning relevant and engaging.  Offer a range of activities that capture student interest and strengthen student engagement in learning so as to promote higher attendance, reduce risk for retention or drop out, and increase the likelihood of graduation.  Actively address the unique learning needs and interests of all types of students, especially those who may benefit from approaches and experiences not offered in the traditional classroom setting.  Contain components designed to improve student academic, social, and emotional outcomes, including opportunities for enrichment programs such as in music and art.  Ensure instruction in any core academic subject offered in the program will be delivered under the supervision of a teacher who is NYS certified in that particular content area.  Engage in outreach activities made to families. Dr. Ronald E. McNair/P.S. 5 is adopting the Renzulli Enrichment model for the school year 2017-2018. This is a project-based model of instruction for all students. the enrichment models allow student to build critical thinking skills through hands-on project-based activities. This program will allow for student clubs to enhance their interests. the types of projects that will be created by students will address their unique learning styles. Materials for the Arts (Arts 2018-19 SCEP-P 42  Program) will play a large role in the development of the project-based activities. Instrumental music, , drama and specialized academic classes will be a part of the club program. A large sports program is in effect. Teachers are attending Confratute (Training program for the Renzulli Enrichment Model) this summer. Teacher leaders will be developed to work with small clusters of teachers to ensure all students receive instruction using this method. A parent academy will be develop, meeting once a month, to enhance the instructional programs, receive professional training and assistance with their children's development. After-school and Saturday programs will be offered to provide enrichment such as music, STEM, Girls Coding, track, cheer leading, and basketball so that students will have a variety of special activities to motivate student engagement and student learning. Materials for the Arts will sponsor a program that will enhance student learning and participation in classroom activities. The leader In Me Initiative will provide activities that promote social and emotional growth such as student leadership council and school leadership roles 9jobs). Student- Led Conferences will engage families. Families will meet monthly to review student work. Students will conduct all meetings. Part 4 – ELT Program Implementation and Oversight Part 4a. Who will implement the ELT program? Who will oversee the program? 1. Indicate the key personnel that will be responsible for implementing and overseeing the ELT program, including school-based staff and any high-quality community partners that will be involved. If applicable, describe the scope of involvement of all community partners and how the joint ELT program is structured. 2. 3. Explain how you will evaluate the program to assess impact on student achievement. The Principal, Assistant Principal and Peer Collaborative Teacher and School-Based Teacher Leaders will be responsible for implementation of this program. The program will be evaluated monthly by student work, teacher meeting minutes and agendas. Student achievement will continue to be evaluated by monthly, bi-monthly and weekly assessments. Part 4b. Timeline for implementation and completion, including start and end dates. The implementation of the initiative will be from September 2017 -June 2018. Part 5 – ELT Budget and Resource Alignment Part 5a. Indicate resources needed including human resources, instructional resources, and schedule adjustments to implement the ELT program. Basic supplies and materials, Training at Confratute, All classroom and Cluster teachers, Departmentalization of students in grades 3-5 and schedule changes to meet the needs of club activities. 2018-19 SCEP-P 43  Part 5b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support the ELT Program. Note: If the program is funded by 21st Century Community Center Learning Funds, it must be offered in conjunction with a high quality, high capacity community partner. X 21st Century Title I 1003(a) Tax Levy X Title III Title I SWP PTA Funded Title I TA SIG Grant P/F Set-aside C4E School Achievement X Other Funding Part 6 – ELT Progress Monitoring Part 6a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. As of February 2019 60% of students will have developed a Leadership Binder that reflects data and the social emotional part of themselves which will lead to an 5% increase in ELA and math progress as evidenced by school-based data located in the Leadership Binder. Part 6b. Indicate the instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Student Leadership Binders, OORS Data, Attendance Data Part 6c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-P 44  Section 7: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) 1:1, SMALL GROUPS, AIS, Students School day, After-schooland Saturday Programming Small Group, Whole Class Small Group, Whole Class School day, After-schooland Saturday Programming School day, After-schooland Saturday Programming School day. Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) SETTS, NUA, RTI, Bundles, ExpeditiaryLearning ,RobinhoodLibrary, Technology Program SETTS, Exemplars, Go Math, RTIprogramming and Robotics Science in class, FOSS & Robotics Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Mathematics Science Social Studies At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Below grade level performance on state tests or assessments Below grade level performance on state tests or assessments Below grade level performance on state tests or assessments Below grade level performance on state tests or assessments Teacher referrals, ACSVisits, Guidance Counselor referrals, observations and anecdotal. In class citywide trade book program Classroom setting, field trips and technology sources SETTS, Counseling, ACSReferrals 1:1, Small Groups, Parent Sessions Schools day. 2018-19 SCEP-P 45  Section 8: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. Guidance services, the Leader In Me Initiative, After-School, Saturday programs, Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). There are presently 80 students identified. 76 students have been identified. 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 SCEP-P 46  n/a 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. n/a 2018-19 SCEP-P 47  Section 9: Title I Program Information Directions:  All schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the strategies and activities for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, staff, and paraprofessionals that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). Teaching Staff turnkeys information during their grade meetings. Teachers share 5 common prep periods each week. Staff is encouraged to attend professional development sessions as well as confer to determine the needs and implementation strategies to utilize with our students. Inter-class, Intra-school Visits Mentor teachers assigned to un-tenured teachers Science & Math ongoing network P.D. Grade Leader Weekly meetings. Online Professional course work offered by Harvard University Out of State Conferences Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. n/a 2018-19 SCEP-P 48  3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). n/a Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/information, early intervention services, etc.). Career and college readiness begins in Pre-Kindergarten and continues through grade five. The curriculum in the content area is aligned to the Standards; therefore transition from Pre-K to elementary is seamless. 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. MOSL team is diverse. When meeting for MOSL meetings, members of the MOSL team are able to assess the opinion of teachers in the school and discuss amongst grade what would be effective in implementation and assessment for the students. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds enables, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (SCEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Column B Section Reference(s) Section4 & Section 7 Section 5a Part3a Action Plan Title I Part A (Basic) Federal Title I School Improvement 1003(a) Federal 144,880 16,979 X x 2018-19 SCEP-P 49  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funds Federal Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Federal Federal Federal Tax Levy (FSF) Local 49,326 85,872 0 0 1,344,639 x X NA NA X Section 4 - SCEPoverview Section 5A Part3b NA NA NA Section4 SCEPoverview 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I School Improvement 1003(a): To support implementation of school improvement activities identified through the Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) reviews or a school review with district oversight and included in the DCIP/SCEP.  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: To support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs. 2018-19 SCEP-P 50   Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan.  Title I Priority and Focus School Parent Engagement Set-aside: Additional set-aside is to enable greater and  more meaningful parent participation in the education of their children. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.  Grant funds awarded via a competitive process, including Title I 1003(g) SIG funds: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 SCEP-P 51  Section 10: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. Dr. Ronald E. McNair -Public School 5, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students Dr. Ronald E. McNair -Public School 5 will support parents and families of Title I students by: ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; 2018-19 SCEP-P 52  ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; The school’s Parent Involvement Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; 2018-19 SCEP-P 53  ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the ESSA; ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) School-Parent Compact (SPC) Dr. Ronald E. McNaIr-Public School 5 , in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will 2018-19 SCEP-P 54  share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; 2018-19 SCEP-P 55  ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; 2018-19 SCEP-P 56  II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; 2018-19 SCEP-P 57  ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 2018-19 SCEP-P 58  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 16 School Name Dr. Ronald E. McNair Borough Brooklyn School Number 005 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Lean Gates Coach ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Wendy Ashton Teacher/Subject Area S.Stewart/Science Teacher/Subject Area P.Porter/Mechanimation Related-Service Provider Mr. Smith Superintendent Rahesha Amon Assistant Principal Kesha Townsel Coach School Counselor R Parent Parent Coordinator Odolph Wright Field Support Center Staff Member Other (Name and Title) C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 0 1 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 2018-19 SCEP-P 59 Total number of ELLs 12 ELLs as share of total student population (%) %  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 1 3 K 0 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 4 0 2 0 5 0 6 0 7 0 8 0 9 0 10 11 12 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? 2018-19 SCEP-P 60  5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. b. TBE program. If applicable. c. DL program. If applicable. 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status 2018-19 SCEP-P 61  6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? 2018-19 SCEP-P 62 d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. 2018-19 SCEP-P 63 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Lena Gates, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 SCEP-P 64  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: School DBN: Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Title Principal Assistant Principal Parent Coordinator ENL/Bilingual Teacher Parent Teacher/Subject Area Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach School Counselor Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 2018-19 SCEP-P 65  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 16BK School Name: Dr. Ronald E. McNair Superintendent: Amon The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No (*Primary) * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. The data used to assess language perferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication derives from the HLIS as well as ATS reports and student Emergency Contact Card. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. 2018-19 SCEP-P 66 Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Language Parent's preferred languages for both written and oral communication is English and may included Spanish and Arabic. 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. Generally the documents our school typically disseminates annually that requires translation would be after-school program information, parent-teacher conference announcements and New York testing dates. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide interpretation service(s)? Throughout thee school year there is one curriculum night and three parent-teacher conferences that would require face to face meetings; as well as scheduled informal teacher to parent meetings. 2018-19 SCEP-P 67  3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? Our school will use information from the parent survey to gather feedback from parents on the quality and availability or services. 2018-19 SCEP-P 68 
