2018-19 COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (CEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 13K011 School Name: P.S. 011 PURVIS J. BEHAN Principal: ABIDEMI HOPE 2018-19 CEP 1  Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 CEP 2  School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information Purvis J. Behan Public School 11 331300010011 Pre-K to 5 419 Waverly Ave Brooklyn NY 11238 School Number (DBN): 13K011 718-638-2661 Phone Number: 718-622-3028 Fax: AbidemiHope AHope@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Email Address: AbidemiHope DiseraFreeman Joshua Bloodworth/ Emily Chen Erica Phillips N/A N/A Clement Rand District Information Geographical District: 13 Superintendent’s Office Address: Zina Cooper Williams Superintendent: 335 Park Place, Brooklyn NY 11238 zcooper@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: (718) 636-3284 Phone Number: (718) 636-3266 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) 2018-19 CEP 3  Brooklyn North Field Support Center FSC: Bernadette Fitzgerald Executive Director: 131 Livingston Street, Brooklyn NY 11201 Executive Director’s Office Address: BFitzge2@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: (718) 935-3954 Phone Number: (718) 935-2382 Fax: 2018-19 CEP 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) AbidemiHope DiseraFreeman Joshua Bloodworth/Emily Chen N/A N/A N/A N/A Diane Nathaniel Nicole Halsey Erica Philips *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/ Guidance Counselor Member/ Parent Member/ Parent 2018-19 CEP 5  Name William Wickland Kara Benton Smith Ingrid Constable-Clarke Yolanda Beaton Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/Teacher Member/Teacher Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ 2018-19 CEP 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with 2018-19 CEP 7  the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement 2018-19 CEP 8  Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Purvis J. Behan Public School 11 strives to develop well-rounded children in an environment that is stimulating, diverse, secure and stable. Our mission is to offer a school community that considers the whole child. We are committed to providing our children with a comprehensive child-centered curriculum that is sensitive to individual learning needs and styles, as well as celebrates and cultivates individual strengths and interests. Through a standards-based curriculum, which includes a rich Arts program, we are committed to developing life-long learners. We view all children as viable contributors to society who will grow to appreciate and cherish their own uniqueness as well as that of the world around them and beyond. We believe that it takes all stakeholders: administrators, teachers and parents, 2018-19 CEP 9  working collaboratively to create a school all our children can flourish in to reach their fullest potential. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. Our school is located in the diverse community of Clinton Hill, Brooklyn, currently serving over 900 students in Pre-Kindergarten through grade 5. Under the leadership of the principal, enrollment has steadily climbed over the past ten years. This can be attributed to high levels of student achievement, a rigorous instructional program, strong parent engagement, and reputation for excellence within our district and city. Additionally, P.S. 11 has a rich history of serving predominantly African American students. We have shown tremendous success in closing the achievement gap with low income students and students of color. Our school believes that developing student voice through written expression is paramount. Our students engage in writing in all learning areas, including art, science, and technology. It is the belief shared by our administrators, teachers, and parents that the key to developing lifelong learners is expressing oneself through writing. Additionally, we hold a strong value for Arts and music education as we believe it nurtures the whole child. Through the course of a child’s experience at P.S. 11, each student will receive art and music instruction, hands-on science education, and an intensive literacy and mathematics curriculum carefully designed from best practices identified within classroom instruction and alignment with the Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS). Our school offers a strong sense of community which begins as soon as you enter our doors. To affirm our shared belief that parents are partners in our school’s success, families are greeted by school staff members, parents, longtime school aides and security staff, who know every child in the school. A dynamic Parent Teacher Association (PTA) supports student achievement through its establishment of the After School Enrichment Program that is open to all students and offers programs in the arts, foreign language, and physical education. The PTA also hosts many family events including Family Movie Night, Readathon, Spooky Funhouse, Winter Wonderland, Spring Fest, Book Bash, in-class author visits, Teacher Time Raffle and our fundraising auction, Raise 11. The P.S. 11 staff, parents, and student body cherishes many yearly traditions, our Curriculum Showcase being the highlight. Each class is transformed into a rich display of the students’ learning throughout the year. It highlights and integrates essential learning and experiences across subject areas and offers unique, rigorous, and exciting opportunities for students to display their talents, passions, strengths, and overall learning. The hallmark of our success has always been our pursuance and recognition of high expectations for all. These high expectations permeate through all aspects of school life and our school community. Some examples of how this manifests are our annual Scholar’s Reception, college tours to prestigious Ivy League Universities, and CCLS embedded in our distinctive Mid-Year Progress Reports. The Mid-Year Progress Report features a “Parents as Partners” section that recognizes the efforts of parents in supporting their child’s education. We believe that our school’s rigorous and holistic curriculum, team of committed and talented educators, and students’ ongoing academic achievement and joy is exemplary in our city, state, and across the country. P.S. 11 proudly flies the National Blue Ribbon Schools banner as a representation of our school community’s excellence. 2018-19 CEP 10  P.S.11 has had substantial success on the NYS English Language Arts (ELA), Mathematics, and Science tests. Since the launch of the new, more rigorous Common Core-Aligned assessments, P.S.11 has out-performed city and state averages. In 2018, 78.0% of our students scored in the proficient or higher range in ELA and 74.4% of our students scored in the proficient or higher range in mathematics. These results are nearly double the city and state averages. With students performing in the lowest third subgroup, we have been able to achieve success in both their performance and progress results as well. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. An area of school-wide focus is the performance of students receiving special education services as there is a need to better prepare this specific population of students to meet grade level standards. Currently, approximately 10% of our student population is students with disabilities. PS 11 offers an integrated co-teaching class on each grade (K - 5). On the 2017 New York State ELA exam for grades 3-5, our students with disabilities achieving proficiency or above was 48.0%. On the New York Mathematics exam for grades 3-5, students with disabilities achieving proficiency or above was 30.8%. This indicates a need to ensure the gap between SWDs and General Education students is less significant. Another population of students that PS 11 has focused its efforts is to address the academic and social-emotional needs of economically disadvantaged students. On the 2017 ELA and Mathematics state exams for grades 3-5, economically disadvantaged students scoring proficiency or above were at 70.5% and 62.7% respectively. In the last two school years, there has been significant improvement in how this population of students has been performing on the state exams. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. The elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which our school made the most progress over the past year has been establishing a Supportive Environment where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. The Learning Environment Survey from 2016-2017 school year reflects 95% positive responses from parents. A focused enhancement of our Saturday Academy, Young Scholar’s Academy, and The Behan Academy for the Arts has allowed teachers to address students’ needs in small targeted instructional groups and foster art music and dance education to enrich many students’ lives. We believe a rich Arts education is key to supporting academic and social-emotional needs of our students. In addition, teachers maintain close communication with families to elicit support for their child’s education at home. An area of school-wide focus is the performance of students receiving special education services as there is a need to better prepare this specific population of students to meet grade level standards. To close the achievement gap, our school has focused attention to building a network of teachers that address the needs of students with disabilities. There is a School-Based Support Team to identify and support students with learning disabilities. Our school follows a Response to Intervention (RTI) model for addressing academic concerns and offers small group extended day and Saturday Academy for students requiring more targeted instruction. Each teacher’s lesson plan is required to incorporate differentiated strategies to support students with special needs. We have a full-time RTI special education teacher who “push in” to classrooms to support the general education teacher in differentiating instruction according to a student’s particular need and we offer collaborative team teaching for those students that require full-time special education support. 2018-19 CEP 11  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 13K011 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration PK,0K,01,02,03,04,05 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 894 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 15 15 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 21 10 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 45.0% % Attendance Rate 40.3% % Reduced Lunch 0.8% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.8% 12.0% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 13.5% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 3.18 0% 21% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 78.0% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 92% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) Yes Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A YES N/A N/A YES Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A YES N/A N/A YES Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A YES High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 41 40 94.7% 4.1% 10.3% 64.7% 1.9% 7.9% 4 25% 5 74.4% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No YES N/A N/A N/A YES YES N/A N/A N/A YES YES N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 CEP 12  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Public School 11 has performed far above the city and state averages on the NYS Common Core-aligned assessments in English Language Arts (ELA) and Mathematics for the last four years. In 2017, 78.0% of our students achieved a level 3 or 4 on the ELA test and 74.4% of students achieved a level 3 or 4 on the mathematics test. These results reflect an decrease of 1.1 percentage points in ELA and 1.1 percentage points in mathematics. Since the institution of more rigorous Common Core aligned tests in the Spring of 2013, our students have consistently outscored the city and state averages, however our students were not performing at the high levels we expected or desired. Too many of our students performed at a Level 2 on the ELA and Mathematics state tests. Also, many of our students who performed at a Level 3 were at the low end of that level. Thankfully, we improved upon this trend in 2016 and 2017. In 2016, our students achieved higher scores on the NYS tests as evidenced by an increase in levels of students scoring proficiency or above. With tougher standardized tests assessing more rigorous standards, we strived to ensure all our students can securely perform at or above proficiency on future state tests. In addition to performance, PS 11 strives to increase the progress of all students in ELA and mathematics. While we were able to achieve increases in our school-wide Mean Proficiency Rating in ELA for both all students (3.48), we were not able to do so with regards to the Math Mean Proficiency Rating for all students (3.49) or with our school. A trend to note is our results with regards to growth for all students in mathematics. We must find ways of moving more students to the next higher level, particularly our students with disabilities. We consistently seek ways to move students performing at a level 3 to a level 4. During our last Quality Review (November 2014), we were rated well-developed in all areas except in indicator 1.2 - Develop teacher pedagogy from a coherent set of beliefs about how students learn best that is informed by the instructional shifts and Danielson Framework for Teaching, aligned to the curricula, engaging, and meets the needs of all learners so that all students produce meaningful work products – where we were rated proficient. This is an area for continued growth. 2018-19 CEP 13  All the above data propels us to believe the challenge, rigor, and accuracy of performance-based activities and assessment (i.e. performance tasks) encourage better mastery of state standards. With performance tasks, students are forced to demonstrate knowledge and skills, including the process by which they solve problems. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Our Mean Proficiency Rating for ELA and Mathematics will increase by 0.1 in ELA and 0.1 points in Math for students in grades 3-5 as measured by the New York State Common Core Exams by June 2019. 2018-19 CEP 14 Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All Students September 2018 - June 2019 All Teachers Instructional Coaches Administrative Team Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). The core instruction of P.S. 11 comprises of reading, writing, math, science, social studies, technology, visual arts and performing arts. Our instruction is fully aligned with the Framework for Great Schools and the Common Core Learning Standards for English Language Arts and Mathematics, and incorporates a hands-on, discovery approach to learning. In our quest to maximize student academic growth and performance, instructional methods and practices exist in a combination of whole class direct and explicit instruction, step-by-step demonstration and modeling, guided and independent practice, small group instruction, timely and actionable teacher feedback, varied assessment approaches measuring student knowledge and understanding, while differentiating content. Our reading curriculum represents 50% narrative study and 50% expository study. We use a comprehensive approach which consists of: whole class novel reading and responses to literature, independent reading and creative writing, content area reading and informational/explanatory writing, and grammar/word work. Through explicit and systemic teaching in these areas, students are provided with rigorous opportunities to apply comprehension strategies, critical thinking strategies and high-level discussion around complex texts. Our writing instruction provides daily time for students to independently apply writing techniques, use the writing process to effectively write for a variety of purposes, and create an engaged community of writers. Informational Reading and Writing – Our program uses a thematic approach that provides students with experiences with social studies and science content. Teachers use resources from Expeditionary Learning, trade books and articles to support that emphasize on informational reading. The curriculum is organized around themes, key details, and concepts that integrate the 2018-19 CEP 15  informational reading CCLS and the NYC Social Studies and Science Scope and Sequence. Instruction in science and social studies, seek to develop academic and domain specific vocabulary as a necessary component of non-fiction reading by requiring students to read and write about a broad range of high quality, increasingly challenging informational texts. In addition, opportunities are provided in the science labs for students to interact, connect prior knowledge to new information. Literary Reading and Writing – Our 60-minute literary block uses authentic narrative text centered on a whole-class novel. Whole-class narrative texts are selected for the richness in content, complexity and for its connections to real world issues. Our literary program deepens our students' understanding of the text and allows for rich discussion that ties together character and plot development, literary themes, text craft and structure and literary devices authors use to create interesting stories. Independent Reading - This 50-minute block is one component of our robust and comprehensive literacy program. During this component, students are reading independently, in partnerships and in small groups to practice their reading skills and strategies. Teachers identify areas of need for individual or groups of students based on the Fountas and Pinnell Running Record Assessment. Instruction is delivered through explicit and direct mini-lessons on reading skills and strategies to help students develop and practice various reading skills. Mathematics - Our 70-minute mathematics block emphasizes on both the Standards for Mathematical Content and Mathematics Practice. Grades K-5 utilize Envision Math 2.0, Number Talks, Exemplars Problem Solving, and Engage NY modules. Through a workshop model approach to Instruction in this subject area, students developed conceptual understanding, procedural fluency, and problem solving. Instruction is grounded in developing essential understandings, not just skills or procedures. Students are required to explain their thinking verbally and in writing, reason and problem solve, use mathematical language, show their answer in multiple ways, and compute accurately. Technology - P.S 11's technology program promotes academic rigor by embedding technology tools and applications into teaching. Our technology program requires students to code and game design with emphasis on problem solving. 2018-19 CEP 16  Visual and Performing Arts - P.S. 11 strives to develop well-rounded children in an environment that is stimulating, diverse and cultured. To meet this, P.S 11's art program offers instrumental music, marching band and the visual arts. Each component of our arts program benefits our students by providing experiential learning, building vocabulary, strengthening critical thinking skills, increasing creativity, and boosting confidence. Instruction in the visual and the performing arts program builds students' knowledge and understanding of how various artists and composers communicate their perceptions, responses and understanding of the world to themselves and to others. Students read and discuss various artists; write about the arts and the artists to reflect on one's own observations and ideas about the arts and participate in collaborative discussion. Instruction will address the varied needs of students with disabilities by using Universal Design for Learning (UDL) techniques, differentiated instruction (content, process, product), and scaffolded lessons. This year, each grade level (K-5) have an ICT class to address students with disabilities in a general education setting. Models of ICT and best practices of parallel teaching will be an expectation in all ICT classrooms. ICT and Self-contained teachers will receive professional development and vertical planning meetings that target the needs of SWDs. Regular meetings to analyze progress of these students will ensure timely feedback can be given to teachers to shift instructional practices to maximize effectiveness. All students (including SWDs) will engage in a variety of reading experiences, strategies and learning activities. Classes will engage in close reading of short and long non-fiction shared texts that will entail reading and analysis of supporting articles, primary and secondary documents, trade books, essays, famous and profound speeches and other non-fiction sources. Teachers will strategically plan regular opportunities for students to read and respond to non-fiction complex texts through meaningful discussions and written tasks to meet this goal with special accommodations for students with disabilities. professional development plan for the year provides teachers with summer and year-round workshops focused on strengthening teacher mathematical content knowledge. Students with Disabilities September 2018 - June 2019 Administration At Risk Students Special Education Teachers AIS Teachers All Teachers of Special Education Students 2018-19 CEP 17  Grade-specific Academic Intervention Teachers will provide targeted instruction with at risk students by pushing in and pulling out of classes for cycles of intervention. For this year, we reconfigured class programming and scheduling to allow for increased problem solving opportunities by 2 additional periods a week. This year, the addition of a full-time instructional coach is charged with mentoring, facilitating professional development, monitoring the quality of instruction, and ensuring the coherence across grades. We believe that all teachers and administrators should continually strive to grow in the content knowledge and pedagogic skills as it directly relates to growth in student academic achievement. P.S. 11 offers job-embedded and after-school professional development opportunities that emphasize the sharing and refining of best practices, building content knowledge, usage of student data and analysis of student work. Our multi-pronged approach to professional development is based on the results of a teacher needs assessment, standardized testing results, teacher observations and other data sources. A Professional Development Team consisting of teachers and administration coordinates PD-related activities throughout the school year. School-wide professional development opportunities will be provided for all teachers in pedagogy, content and best practices that align to highly effective instruction on the Charlotte Danielson's Framework for Teaching. These opportunities include our August Literacy and Math Summer Institutes, Summer planning and Curriculum development , off-site professional development, vertical grade planning conferences, grade common planning blocks, Mondays Professional Development, collegial learning walks, inter-visitations and demonstration of lessons. Our two full-time instructional coaches will also provide ongoing training on developing teacher's literacy and mathematics content knowledge and ensure the CCLS are fully integrated into lessons. All Teachers September 2018 - June 2019 All Teachers Administration Instructional Coach Professional Development Team Members 2018-19 CEP 18 Parents September 2018 - June 2019 Administrative Team Parent Coordinator Each year commences with grade level Parent Curriculum Orientations to inform parents of the school’s instructional expectations and goals. Principal monthly Sip-and-Chat discussions and general PTA Meetings address instructional expectations, school goals and how parents can support established school goals at home including supports for SWDs. Selected teachers conduct workshops to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math and use of technology to access the NYC Schools account and other useful resources to track and monitor progress. Parent workshops are also provided to assist parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments to meet the school and city goals. Parent meetings with ELL and special education students are conducted to more closely discuss school goals and the role of parents to achieve our goal. Parents will receive class newsletters giving information as to current topics of study and ways to support the growth of their child in this area. Parent workshops stressing the CCLS will be offered in the evenings for parents to attend to deepen their understanding of these shifts in literacy. Regular class trips will be scheduled that support the non-fiction work. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Throughout the school year, parents will be provided to actively engage in learning opportunities to support their child's growth. This year, we have initiated student-led conferences in grades 3-5 starting from the first Parent-Teacher conference in November. Teachers. parents, and students will have discussion over their portfolio of work with the student showcasing their progress towards goals and their understanding of the performance towards the Common Core Standards. Parents will also be invited to a variety of curriculum-aligned events including evening parent workshops on the Common Core, Test Sophistication, and Digital Citizenry. Our annual Curriculum Night and Curriculum Showcase allow families to learn about the curriculum and the project-based learning that their child will undertake. 2018-19 CEP 19  The administrative team will hold monthly Sip and Chat forums, Meet and Greets, and Parent-Teacher Association meetings to field parent questions and concerns. Teachers will send home monthly newsletters and hold in-class publishing celebrations to inform families as to current units of study. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. To achieve this goal, the Instructional Coach, Assistant Principals and Principal will provide professional support to teachers (FSF, CF4). Teachers will also receive professional development from outside sources (FSF per diem coverage). Teachers will participate in four collaborative inquiry cycles throughout the school year to analyze assessment data and student work to develop targeted action plans to impact student growth. In addition, teachers will meet three times weekly for curriculum and instructional common planning periods to adapt units of study and lesson plans to address areas in need of improvement. Professional development sessions will be primarily led by teachers sharing best practices as observed through ongoing teacher observations. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. In order to monitor progress in all grades, we have designed a full school year assessment calendar. The assessment calendar specifies a timeline for administration of ELA and Mathematics benchmark assessments. Our initial schoolwide assessments during September and October are the enVisionMath Baseline assessment, ELA Performance Tasks (MOSL), Running Records, and Early Childhood Literacy Baseline Assessment. In November, we will administer the In-House ELA Benchmark and Performance Task #1. By February/March 2018, students will how 0.05% progress in ELA and 0.1% progress in math using mean proficiency rating on mid-point benchmarks using our In-house ELA Benchmark Assessment and Performance Task #2 and our CCLS-aligned ELA and Math Spring Benchmark. Throughout April, students in grades 3-5 will take the New York State ELA and Mathematics Exams. In May and June, we will be administer the End-of-Year ELA and Mathematics (MOSL) in addition to our final Running Records. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) The instruments that will be used to measure the progress of this goal are: Fountas and Pinnell Running Record Benchmark Assessment Levels (Triannually)   EnVision Baseline Assessment   ELA and Math Performance Tasks (Pre and Post) In-House ELA and Mathematics Assessments 2018-19 CEP 20  Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 21  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? Public School 11 is a learning community that supports the academic and social emotional needs of all students. Through our rigorous curriculum and social emotional initiatives, we foster a school where children feel secure, supported, and are encouraged to work hard. The 2016 - 2017 Learning Environment Survey showed a score of 3.16 for Supportive Environment. An analysis of the data showed a gap between how teachers and parents responded. The average percentage rating that parents indicated on the Learning Environment Survey generally scored between 90% - 95%. In looking at teacher responses, certain categories linked to Supportive Environment under-scored district and city levels. For instance, the "Social Emotional" category scored - 6% lower than district levels in the same category. 73% "of teachers responded that a lot or all of the adults at their school have access to school based supports to assist in behavioral/emotional escalations. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, our School Quality Guide score relating to the "Supportive Environment" area of the Framework for Great Schools will have a net increase from 3.16 to 3.36. 2018-19 CEP 22  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Teacher-Led Student Groups: 1. Weekly Class Advisory Meetings 2. Monthly Boys to Men Group (4-5) 3. Monthly Female Global Leaders Group (4-5) / Girls Loving Our Within (2-3) Through discussion, videos, role playing, and texts, students will delve deeper into the meanings, relevancy, and implementation of the PS 11 Values We Live By. They will also develop the skills needed to regulate their behaviors, tips to advocate for themselves and how to effectively problem solve using the Habits of Mind and/or Growth Mindset practices. Partnership with Child Mind Institute: Selected students exhibiting counter-productive behaviors and those at risk of academic failure will be supported by a trained professional who will work on coping strategies, regulating and monitoring negative behaviors, and improving peer relationships. Habits and Behaviors Self-Monitoring Recording Sheet: Students will monitor their behaviors in and out of the classroom focusing on the school values or the habits of mind characteristic taught and their implementation of said value or habit - students will have the value sheet signed by their parent - sheets will also be discussed during PTC Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All Students (K - 5) October 2018 - June 2019 Teachers Administrative Team 2018 - 2019 Principal Guidance Counselor 2018 - 2019 Teachers, parents Selected Students (2 - 5) Selected Students (2 - 5) In-school Student Recognition Practices All students 2018 - 2019 Students, parents and Teachers 2018-19 CEP 23  Praise Wall Awards Assemblies 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Parent workshops and monthly forums will be held to direct parents in how to support their child's social emotional growth. These workshops include a Digital Citizenry workshop for parents in December 2018 and monthly "Dad's Nights" for building family engagement. Student-Led Conferences for grade 3-5 will focus on self-reflective goals for both academic and social-emotional skills. At-Promise groups will be held regularly to address social-emotional student issues. The guidance counselor will also have a New Student Meet-up group to address the needs of students transitioning to PS 11 from another school. The Sister's Circle group will host a variety of in-school and off-site activities to support the social-emotional growth of our fourth and fifth grade girls. Activities include the Sister's Tea event and student performances. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc.  Teachers will engage in a study group around the professional texts, Leaders of Their Own Learning and Creating Cultures of Thinking, in order to gain knowledge on setting character learning target and implementing Student-Led conferences.  Every First Thursday of the month, teachers of grades 4 and 5 will meet with students during our Boys to Men and Female Global Leaders meetings.  All classes (K-5) will meet during Friday afternoons for a Weekly Class Advisory Meeting.  Award assemblies will take place once a month to publicly acknowledge students demonstrating the Values we Live By and Habits of Mind Practices. 2018-19 CEP 24   During a Monday Professional Development time, teachers will receive training on Habits of Mind, Growth Mindset, and how to use the in-house created Habits of Mind Checklist. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal.  By December 2018 all staff will be trained in the Habits of Mind and Growth Mindset Practices.  By January 2019 all staff and students will be trained on using the Habits of Mind Checklist.  By February 2019 all students will use the Habits of Mind Checklist to reflect and grade themselves in identified areas.  By February 2019 the Child Mind Institute Personnel will meet with administration to provide feedback on the effectiveness of the strategies that were taught to students.  By March 2019 all students will be trained to used the Habits of Mind Checklist during student led conferences. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. - Self Monitoring Sheet - Parent Teacher Conferences feedback - Learning Environment Survey results Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 25  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. During informal and formal observations of teacher practice and needs surveys, it was determined that teachers would benefit from more professional development, particularly in components (3b) and (3c) outlined in the Danielson Framework for Teaching. We determined that our teachers are aware of and apply the expectations of the framework for teacher practice and the Depth of Knowledge (DOK) Matrix, however the level of questioning and discussion, as well as level of intellectual and cognitive engagement across classrooms is inconsistent. In addition, teachers needed to deepen the level of student cognitive engagement in daily learning activities, discussion, and student work. According to the ADVANCE observational school-wide data on the eight rated components of Danielson’s Framework for Learning, it was identified that teachers scored lower in (3b) Using Questioning and Discussion Techniques and (3c) Engaging Students in Learning as compared to the other components of the rubric. In addition, in professional development meetings, surveys, and teacher team discussions, it was evident that these specific components would have the most impact on instruction, teacher practices and student outcomes. According to the 2017-2018 Advance data, 95% of PS 11 teachers scored effective or highly effective on the Measures of Teacher Practice (MOTP). Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Through collaborative teacher inquiry and targeted professional learning opportunities, teachers will develop highly effective instructional strategies resulting in an school-wide increase of 2% points in the percentage of teachers scoring effective or highly effective in their Measure of Teacher Practice (MOTP) by June 2019. 2018-19 CEP 26  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). School-wide professional development opportunities will be provided for all teachers in pedagogy and best practices that align to highly effective instruction. These opportunities include our Summer Institute, off-site professional development, and in-house workshops. We will continue vertical planning with a focus on best practices supporting students with special needs in ICT, self contained, and general education settings including SETTS students. We believe that our Professional Development Team consisting of teachers and administration will coordinate PD-related activities throughout the school year. Teacher teams will have designated grade ambassadors that coordinate professional learning on their grade level. Our professional development time on Mondays (2:40pm – 4:00pm) will be based on quantitative data from ADVANCE, a survey of teacher needs, and in consultation with the Professional Development Team. These professional development activities will be differentiated for teachers by grade, areas for improvement, and teacher interest. Teachers will lead professional development in break-out sessions based on best practices observed through formal and informal observations. The administrative team will regularly observe instruction and provide feedback to teachers as it relates to components (3b) and (3c) of the Danielson Framework for Teaching with special modifications for SWDs. Teachers will collaborate during teacher team meetings to engage in cycles of collaborative inquiry. In order to improve student achievement, teachers will work together closely to analyze data and propose and test solutions that they believe will impact student learning. Data inquiry teams will implement concrete action plans to improve teacher practice and impact student learning. For this year, inquiry teams will be organized on each grade level, Pre-K to 5. There will be four cycles of inquiry that follow our Inquiry Calendar which provides a timeline and focus for each inquiry cycle. This inquiry calendar corresponds with our School-wide Assessment Calendar. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All Teachers, with focus on Special Education August 2018-June 2019 Administration, Professional Development Team All Teachers September 2018-June 2019 Administration and Teachers All Teachers September 2018 -June 2019 Administration All Teachers September 2018 - June 2019 Administration and Teachers 2018-19 CEP 27  Inquiry work will be a means to leverage professional development learning in order to impact student achievement. The administrative team will monitor teacher team meetings for effectiveness. Teams will follow established protocols for looking at student work and protocols for looking at student data. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. We will offer families opportunities to observe teacher instructional practice during our Bring Your Parents To School Days. There will be three days in December for parents to visit the classroom and observe instruction and how instruction is tailored to their child's needs. All teachers, including cluster teachers, will be expected to open up their classrooms. In addition, our Curriculum Showcase will invite families to experience their child's learning through a project-based approach. Parents will also volunteer time and resources to transform their child's teacher's classroom to a setting aligned to their unit of study. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Professional development resources will be provided in-school and off-site using district and citywide professional development opportunities. Monday professional development time, job-embedded professional development, common planning periods, and per session workshops and study groups will all be used to lift the level of teacher practice within the school. Teachers using highly effective practices will lead professional development along with the support of the administrative team. For new teachers, mentorships will be established to support their growth and a Professional Development Team will be established to coordinate all PD-related activities. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. To monitor progress of this goal, we will:  Use student results from periodic in-house assessments to analyze student and teacher needs 2018-19 CEP 28   By February 2018, student outcomes will improve by 1.5% as measured by mid-year benchmark assessments in ELA and Math.  Conduct ongoing formal and informal classroom observations using the Danielson's framework for Teaching to evaluate the quality of teaching in classrooms and to inform specific professional learning opportunities needed to enhance teacher effectiveness  Provide effective and actionable teacher feedback to elevate the level of pedagogical practices in classrooms  Engage in cycles of collaborative inquiry to maintain ongoing conversations about student work and assessment results to ensure better student outcomes Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress.  ADVANCE MOTP observation data [ADVANCE Web Application Reports] Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 29  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Leadership at P.S. 11 is achieved through a shared responsibility to build capacity and empower teachers, parents and students. We firmly believe that the job of educating children lies in the hands of all stakeholders and through distributed leadership. In evaluating effective school leadership based on the framework and the 2016-2017 Learning Environment Survey, 100% of the staff strongly agree and agree that school leaders communicates a clear vision for the school, place a high emphasis on the quality of teaching and set high standards for student learning. Our leadership team stresses the importance of developing a highly skilled and knowledgeable staff while creating a wholesome, inclusive, inspiring, trusting and risk-free environment. Overall Strengths Summer Instructional and Curriculum Planning Saturday Academy  Three times a week grade common planning and instructional blocks  Weekly inquiry team meetings   Math and Literacy August Institutes  Thursday Extended Day Learning Program   Responses to Intervention for students working below the sphere of success  New Teacher Summer Orientation Workshops  Monthly New Teacher Meetings  Mondays Professional Learning Sessions and Cycles  Teacher-to -Teacher Mentoring  Grade Ambassadors  Grade Instructional Liaisons for Literacy and Mathematics   Daily Learning Walks  Cycles of formal and informal observations   Teacher-Led Professional Learning Opportunities  Teacher-Led grades 4 and 5 boys group, "Boys to Men."  Teacher -Led grades 4 and 5 girls group, "Global Leaders."  Teacher-Led grades 2 and 3 girls group "GLOW."  Teacher - Led grades 2 and 3 boys group " Behan Boys Club." Instructional and Classroom Inter-visitation Cycles Frequent Teacher Feedback Area for Improvement 2018-19 CEP 30   More professional learning opportunities around best practices and techniques for teaching students with disabilities. Teacher's complete a professional goals form that is shared and discussed during their Initial Planning Conferences at the beginning of the school year. The majority (over 85%) of teachers cited more professional opportunities as a need to accomplish their goals. For the 2018-2019 school year, 2 instructional coaches will continue to fulfill individualized professional development needs. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, we will target the pedagogical needs of teachers by leveraging the skills and expertise of the P.S. 11 teachers to allow for the sharing of best practices by offering all teachers individual, grade, and school level professional development workshops. 2018-19 CEP 31 Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All Teachers September 2018-June 2019 Administrators, Teachers, and Instructional Coach Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). To ensure success of all learners and their needs, we have set instructional expectations of rigor for all educators as well as students. Challenging tasks, demanding goals and structured learning opportunities are embedded in every lesson. Our instructional program provides students with regular and ongoing experiences requiring students to think, reason, conjecture, debate, challenge and problem solve across the curricular program. We will continue to support teachers' efforts in developing highly effective lesson plans that maximize student learning and monitor student progress by :  Teachers in the same grade level will coordinate curriculum, instruction and learning materials.   Grade Ambassadors will facilitate operational grade meetings. Grade Ambassadors have been an integral part in our shared leadership approach. Ambassadors serve as leaders to keep their colleagues on track with all school-wide operational time lines and assist teachers who are new to the grade. Instructional Liaisons will facilitate curriculum and instructional development and implementation for literacy and mathematics. Instructional Liaisons serve as leaders for Literacy and Mathematics. Instructional liaisons will meet with teachers on the same grade level to collaborate on, develop curriculum, analyze student work, develop and revise assessments, revise pacing calendar and present best practices to each other.  Grade level Inquiry Teams will work together with Instructional Coach and Administrators to examine a variety of assessments to make informed decisions about curriculum revisions and create and find curriculum for differentiation (extension or remediation.)  The administrative team will regularly observe instruction and provide feedback to teachers as it relates to components (3b) and (3c) of the Danielson Framework for Teaching with special modifications for SWDs. 2018-19 CEP 32   On-going meetings with the SIT/CARE team to discuss IEP students academic progress. Instruction will address the varied needs of students with disabilities by using Universal Design for Learning (UDL) techniques, differentiated instruction (content, process, product), and scaffolded lessons. September 2018-June 2019 All Teachers, Service Providers, Para-Professionals Special Education Teachers, General Education Teachers and Instructional Coach This year, each grade level (K-5) have an ICT class to address students with disabilities in a general education setting. Models of ICT and best practices of parallel teaching will be an expectation in all ICT classrooms. ICT and Self-contained teachers will receive professional development and vertical planning meetings that target the needs of SWDs. Regular meetings to analyze progress of these students will ensure timely feedback can be given to teachers to shift instructional practices to maximize effectiveness. All students (including SWDs) will engage in a variety of reading experiences, strategies and learning activities. Classes will engage in close reading of short and long non-fiction shared texts that will entail reading and analysis of supporting articles, primary and secondary documents, trade books, essays, famous and profound speeches and other non-fiction sources. Teachers will strategically plan regular opportunities for students to read and respond to non-fiction complex texts through meaningful discussions and written tasks to meet this goal with special accommodations for students with disabilities. professional development plan for the year provides teachers with summer and year-round workshops focused on strengthening teacher mathematical content knowledge. For this year, we reconfigured class programming and scheduling to allow for increased problem solving opportunities by 2 additional periods a week. This year, the addition of a full-time instructional coach is charged with mentoring, facilitating professional development, monitoring the quality of instruction, and ensuring the coherence across grades. All September 2018-June 2019 Administrators, Teachers, Instructional Coach, 2018-19 CEP 33  1. Professional development resources will be provided in-school and off-site using district and citywide professional development opportunities. teachers and Para-professionals Professional Development Team Members 2. Monday professional development time, job-embedded professional development, common planning periods, and per session workshops and study groups will all be used to lift the level of teacher practice within the school. 3. Analyze HEDI ratings to determine areas of improvement for teachers and for teachers who have demonstrated highly effective instructional practices. 4. Instructional Coaches will support teachers in their pedagogical work. In addition, instructional coaches will support teachers individually and work to provide individualized professional learning opportunities. 5. Conduct school-wide and targeted professional developments sessions focused on UDL strategies, techniques and best practices. Each year commences with grade level Parent Curriculum Orientations to inform parents of the school’s instructional expectations and goals. Principal monthly Sip-and-Chat discussions and general PTA Meetings address instructional expectations, school goals and how parents can support established school goals at home including supports for SWDs. Selected teachers conduct workshops to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math and use of technology to access the NYC Schools account and other useful resources to track and monitor progress. Parent workshops are also provided to assist parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments to meet the school and city goals. Parent meetings with ELL and special education students are conducted to more closely discuss school goals and the role of parents to achieve our goal. Parents will receive class newsletters giving information as to current topics of study and ways to support the growth of their child in this area. Parent workshops stressing the CCLS will be offered in the evenings for parents to attend to deepen their understanding of Parents September 2018- June 2019 Administrators and Teachers 2018-19 CEP 34 these shifts in literacy. Regular class trips will be scheduled that support the non-fiction work. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Parents will be provided many opportunities to lead at PS 11. Our Parents as Partners initiatives links actively engaged parents to support and coordinate our residency programs in grades K-5. In addition, each class has a "Class Parent" that is charged with keeping parents informed of all activities and events school-wide. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Two instructional coaches using tax levy (FSF) will focus on individualizing professional development opportunities with staff. Per session will be provided for professional development workshops and mentoring sessions. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA Title II, Part A SIG X PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. To monitor progress of this goal, we will:  By February 2018, three-quarters of the teaching will have had several opportunities for on-site/off-site professional development that targets areas of need.  Conduct ongoing formal and informal classroom observations using the Danielson's framework for Teaching to evaluate the quality of teaching in classrooms and to inform specific professional learning opportunities needed to enhance teacher effectiveness  Provide effective and actionable teacher feedback to elevate the level of pedagogical practices in classrooms  Engage in cycles of collaborative inquiry to maintain ongoing conversations about student work and assessment results to ensure better student outcomes Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress.  ADVANCE MOTP Ratings  End-of-Year Summative Conference    Parent Feedback Student Benchmarks Results Student Reflections on their learning Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 35  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. According to enrollment data, PS 11 has grown steadily over the last eight years, and now has over 900 students. Even with an ever increasing student population, PS 11 is been able to build and maintain a school culture that is welcoming and supportive. We are a school when families are welcomed to participate and contribute to the school in varied ways. We believe in tapping into the resources and knowledge of our families and community organization. Our PTA is very active and teachers generally have good relationships with families and students. There are many initiatives in place designed to keep parents informed, involved and connected to the vision and mission of the school. Some of the initiatives that are currently in place are:  Monthly Class Newsletters- communicates information about the units of study and upcoming events.  School Messenger Service that calls parents to remind them of important meetings, dates, school closures etc...  Red Communication Folder - holds important notices for families and serves as a vehicle to return notes or permission slips to teachers  Parent workshops - to provide information about the curriculum, state testing, and other academic concerns  Curriculum Night - to provide parents of the grade level curriculum, academic and classroom expectations  Meet the Teacher Night - to provide an opportunity for families to meet teachers of the upcoming grade and discuss the curriculum  Monthly Principal's Sip and Chat - an open forum for parents to share questions, suggestions and concerns  PS 11 PTA List Serve - an email-based communication group that serves members of the school community  Parents as Reading Partners - an opportunity for families to come into the classrooms to read to students and engage in an art or writing activity  Class Parents - a primary link to all communication between the school's leadership, the PTA, the teacher and other parents in their class  New Families Committee - seeks to welcome and support new families with getting acclimated with the school environment  PTA Community Engagement Activities such as Family Movie Night, Spring Fest,  PS 11 Website - contains information about the school, the PTA and School Leadership Team. The website also holds the school calendar listing all yearly school events, tests, breaks and holidays As student enrollment continues to grow, the one concern that many parents had was viable after school options. While there are many programs in the immediate area that offer pick up services for our students, the primary choices for the majority of our families are the in-house after school offerings. PS 11 has two school-based after school options: the Dodge Y after school, which is a free program and the PTA sponsored After School Enrichment, which is a fee based program comprised of various community vendors that provide an assortment of academic, athletic and arts options. Part 2 – Annual Goal 2018-19 CEP 36  Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Public School 11 will increase the number of students from Pre-Kindergarten to grade 5 enrolled in extra-curricula and academic after-school programs by 3% from the previous year by the end of June 2019. 2018-19 CEP 37  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? The Dodge Y will be expanding its maximum enrollment from 159 to 193 in this school year. All Students September 2018 - June 2019 YMCA Director Principal The After School Enrichment's Fall enrollment went from 200 in the Fall of 2016 to 350 by offering additional classes and homework assistance. All Students Sept 2018 - June 2019 ASE Director Students with disabilities will have increased access to enrichment programs and homework assistance with the ASE SWD Grade-specific Academic Intervention Teachers will provide targeted instruction with at risk students by pushing in and pulling out of classes for cycles of intervention. At Risk Students September 2018 - June 2019 September 2018 - June 2019 PTA Exec. Board Principal ASE Director Administrative Team AIS teachers Classroom teachers Administrative Team 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. Dodge YMCA - on-site program at PS 11 Afterschool Enrichment Program (ASE) - on-site CBO World Languages Immersion Program - Spanish and Mandarin (Wednesdays through Friday) afterschool Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment 2018-19 CEP 38  Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. The Dodge YMCA is a free-program funded independently from the school. The ASE is a fee-based program. The cost is covered by individual families. The World Languages Immersion Program is funded through the PTA and tax levy (FSF). Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA Title II, Part A SIG X PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. - Audit of enrollment numbers for Fall and Winter sessions of ASE. - Evaluation of wait list numbers Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. - Enrollment numbers will be periodically audited three times during the year (Fall, Winter, Spring). - Parents responses on Learning Environment Survey related to After school options. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 39  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Fountas and Pinnel Running Record Assessments Periodic ELA Benchmark Assessments NYS ELA Exam Report Card Teacher Recommendation ELA Performance Tasks When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) During the school day Afterschool Extended Day Saturday Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) Students receive ELA Academic Intervention Services from their classroom teachers. Students are One-to-one Small group Thursday AIS Extended Day Program identified through several literacy Saturday Academy assessments such as the Fountas and Young Scholars Academy AIS Teacher Pinnell Benchmark Assessment System to determine the area(s) of need and strength. Teachers then formulate an individualized action plan that includes student goals, one-to-one conferences and differentiated small group instruction. Additionally, during the Thursday Extended Day program, students receive targeted ELA intervention instruction that focuses on building 2018-19 CEP 40  Mathematics Periodic Math Benchmark Assessments NYS Math Exam Report Card Teacher Recommendation Math Performance Tasks Science Nonfiction Fountas and Pinnel Running Record Assessment 4 th Grade NYS Science Exam NYS ELA Exam Report Card Teacher Recommendation comprehension strategies. Students receive Math Academic Intervention Services from their classroom teachers. Students are identified through several math assessments such as Bi-monthly In-house Benchmarks to determine the area(s) of need and strength. Teachers then formulate an individualized action plan that includes student goals, math games, math journals, one-to-one conferences and differentiated small group instructions. Additionally, during Thursday AIS Extended Day program, students receive targeted math intervention instruction that focuses on building problem solving strategies. Students receive Science Academic Intervention Services from their classroom teachers. Students are identified through science unit exams, quizzes, projects and teacher observations to determine the area(s) of need and strength. Using differentiated During the school day Afterschool Extended Day Saturday One-to-one Small group Thursday AIS Extended Day Program Saturday Academy Young Scholars Academy AIS Teacher During the school day Afterschool Extended Day Saturday One-to-one Small group Thursday AIS Extended Day Program Saturday Academy Young Scholars Academy 2018-19 CEP 41  Social Studies Nonfiction Fountas and Pinnel Running Record Assessment NYS ELA Exam Report Card Teacher Recommendation Content Area Performance Tasks AIS Teacher During the school day Afterschool Extended Day Saturday One-to-one Small group Thursday AIS Extended Day Program Saturday Academy Young Scholars Academy AIS Teacher small group instructions, teachers practice building comprehension strategies through content area text. Additionally, during the Thursday AIS Extended Day program, students receive targeted content area instruction that focuses on building comprehension strategies . Students receive Social Studies Academic Intervention Services from their classroom teachers. Students are identified through social studies unit exams, quizzes, projects and teacher observations to determine the area(s) of need and strength. Using differentiated small group instructions, teachers practice building comprehension strategies through content area text. Additionally, during the Thursday AIS Extended Day program, students receive targeted content area instruction that focuses on building comprehension strategies . 2018-19 CEP 42  At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Parent Referral School-based Support Team Recommendation / SIT Team Recommendation At-risk services are provided to students who are not receiving mandated counseling but need some assistance in areas of social, emotional and behavioral issues. One-to-one Small group During the school day Afterschool Teacher Recommendation The Guidance Counselor provides individual and group counseling. Students explore different skills and techniques like character development, respect, goal setting, the importance of following rules and completing tasks. These skills will help them integrate into the school community and socialize with their peers. The atmosphere provides for the students to talk about different situations that may be affecting their academic and social emotional growth. The Guidance Counselor develops behavior contracts with the student, parent and teacher to monitor the progress or lack of progress of the student. This helps to measure the success of the services being provided. Most students who are at risk receive the counseling anywhere from four to six weeks on a 2018-19 CEP 43  consistent basis and then the services are gradually terminated. The C.A.R.E. team meets monthly to discuss and identify severely at-risk students who have already received intervention through the P.S 11 guidance counselor. These students then have individual one-on-one meetings with the school psychologist. These meetings happen during the regular school day. P.S. 11 Social Worker provides family counseling and referral services for families in crisis who are experiencing social and emotional problems. School Nurse provides: 1. Skilled health care services such as medication administration due to an acute illness or chronic condition. 2. Case findings through review of physical examination forms, vision screenings and 2018-19 CEP 44  teacher/nurse observation. Suspected health problems are referred for further assessment by PCP (Privacy Care Physician). 3. Asthmatic students attend Health Education classes and Open Airway which is a self- management program developed by the American Lung Association. 4. HOPS-(Healthy Options and Physical Activity Programs In Schools). This is collaboration between School Food, Physical Education, School Wellness Council and Office of School Health to assist students with Body Mass Index (BMI’S), 2018-19 CEP 45  99% of our students reach a healthy weight. 2018-19 CEP 46  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. N/A Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). 52 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 CEP 47  Saturday Academy   Thursday Extended Day Learning  The purchasing of school supplies and summer reading books to decrease summer "brain drain"  Mentoring group through various group clubs  Afterschool enrichment activities 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. $45,000 2018-19 CEP 48  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools X Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. N/A 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). N/A Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A 2018-19 CEP 49  Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). N/A 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. N/A 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Column B Verify with an (X) Section Reference(s) Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. 2018-19 CEP 50  Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 CEP 51  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. 13K011, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Public School 11 will support parents and families of Title I students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; 2018-19 CEP 52  ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; The school’s Parent Involvement Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; 2018-19 CEP 53  ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) Template School-Parent Compact (SPC) 13K011 is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. 2018-19 CEP 54  Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; 2018-19 CEP 55  Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; 2018-19 CEP 56  ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 2018-19 CEP 57  2018-19 CEP 58  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 13 School Name Purvis J. Behan Borough Brooklyn School Number 011 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Abidemi Hope Coach ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Marta Miszczak Teacher/Subject Area Salisha Jackson Teacher/Subject Area Related-Service Provider Oksana Savuk Superintendent Assistant Principal Alain Beugoms Coach School Counselor Diane Nathanial Parent Joshua Bloodworth Parent Coordinator Clement Rand Field Support Center Staff Member Other (Name and Title) C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 1 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 811 2018-19 CEP 59 Total number of ELLs 14 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 1.73%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 1 2 4 3 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? P.S. 11 uses Fountas and Pinnell in order to assess the early literacy skills of all students. The data gathered from these assessments allows teachers to match students to their appropriate reading levels. This information also helps inform the school's instructional plan by pinpointing the skills that students have already acquired and those areas that require the most attention. The New York State Identification Test for English Language Learners [NYSITELL] (newly enrolled ELLs) and the New York State English as a Second Language Achievement Test [NYSESLAT] test scores are taken into consideration when planning and grouping ELLs for pull-out English as a New Language [ENL] services. There are 14 current ELLs and 4 former ELLs receiving services. Of the 14 current ELLs, 6 took the NYSITELL (June/Sept 2016) and 8 took the NYSESLAT (May 2016). Based on the NYSITELL results, one kindergartener is at the Entering level and two scored on the Transitioning level. In addition, one first-grader and one second-grader are also on the Entering level, while another first-grader is on the Transitioning level. According to the spring 2016 NYSESLAT data, two second-graders and one third-grader are at the Transitioning level and two first-graders, one second-grader, one third-grader, and one fourth-grader are at the Expanding level. The ENL teacher has also 2018-19 CEP 60  created assessments that are given to ELLs as initial, mid-year, and final assessments and which measure growth in phonemic awareness skills as well as the four language modalities. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? P.S. 11 has several structures in place to support instructional planning for ELLs. All teachers of a particular grade level meet for common preps three times a week. One prep is focused on inquiry, the next on literacy development, and the third on math. Teachers use this time to analyze student data, pinpoint strengths and weaknesses, and plan instruction for all students. Additionally, the ENL teacher meets with all teachers of ELLs throughout the year in order to discuss and analyze students' academic as well as social/emotional strengths and needs, their academic growth, and next steps in a collaborative effort to support the students. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? Teachers at P.S. 11 assess students' literacy skills using Fountas and Pinnell three times a year, in September/October, February, and the May/June. Two performance tasks are given in the fall and spring, one assessing literacy skills and the other math. These performance tasks are drawn from a number of sources including Engage NY, Pearson Learning, Expeditionary Learning, and Teacher's College. In addition, Measures of Student Learning [MOSL] data is closely analyzed and is used to make informed decision on areas of need for each student. The end of the year MOSL sets the stage for the following school year. Teachers use their inquiry time to do a detailed item analysis to pinpoint areas of growth as well as areas of need. Inquiry time is devoted to dissecting assessments in order to see gaps in student learning and to identify the standards that students have met and those they have not. An assessment calendar is created for the school year and outlines assessments that are to be analyzed in any given month. For example, in September, inquiry team time is used to analyze running records as well as the end-of-year MOSL from the previous year. Finally, the ENL teacher has developed an assessment packet that each ENL student completed three times a year, and uses the data to plan instruction. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? At the end of each school year, based on teacher observation and documentation (articulation sheets), students are flagged for academic intervention for the upcoming year. Students who are holdovers are also automatically flagged for intervention services. In addition, assessment results and observations throughout the year are brought to the attention of the principal and academic interventions are put into place if deemed necessary. P.S. 11 has a host of interventions designed to aid students in need. Thursday Afters School Intervention provides instruction to students in grades 1-5 who require extra assistance. Saturday Academy is another program which helps students progress academically. The programs provides students in grades 1-2 with targeted intervention in reading and math. Upper grades (3-5) focus on test-taking skills and strategies to help students succeed on the New York State Math and English Language Arts [ELA] exams. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] The Response to Intervention (RTI) model is one which focuses on prevention and early intervention should a student be struggling. There are 3 tiers of intervention beginning with Tier 1. This is based on the core curriculum in which targeted and differentiated instruction is available to all students in a general education classroom. If a student needs additional support, he/she is moved to the Tier 2 and later Tier 3 levels. These tiers provide more instructional support through small group instruction, Academic Intervention Services or other interventions. As the student progresses and this progress is measured through a variety of assessments, the additional academic supports are removed. If data shows that a student is not thriving academically, the general education as well as ENL teachers will meet in order to discuss differentiated instruction that can be put into place to allow the student better access to the curriculum. The ENL teacher also supports the classroom teacher’s instruction during ENL pull-out services. If an ELL is performing on level 1 or 2, the student is moved to Tier 2 of the RTI framework. This student receives additional after school as well as Saturday Academy academic instruction. Small-group, targeted instruction is put in place in order to help the student succeed. ELLs who received a Commanding on the NYSESLAT (May 2015 and 2016) will receive 90 minutes of integrated ENL weekly as per the new CR- Part 154 mandates. The classroom teacher continues to differentiate instruction to meet the newly proficient 2018-19 CEP 61  students' needs. They are also given the opportunity to attend all after school programs. They are entitled to ELL testing accommodations for two years after they achieve proficiency on the NYSESLAT. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. The NYSESLAT data shows that ELLs are making incremental gains on the assessment by annually moving forward to the next proficiency level on their way to becoming English language proficient. Many ELLs come in on the Advanced level in kindergarten and test out of the program by the end of the first grade. For this reason, the majority of our ELLs are found in grades K-1. ELLs who are at the Beginner level are all newcomers. The NYSITELL test results indicate that newly enrolled ELLs need the greatest amount of support in reading. The NYSESLAT results indicate that the ENL teacher needs to focus on reading and writing at all grade levels. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? The ENL teacher analyses the NYSESLAT data when the results become available in September. The ENL teacher then creates articulation sheets which explain each student's results and current proficiency level. These articulation sheets and findings are shared with the teachers. The ENL teacher meets with each teacher of former and current ELLs in order to discuss their ELL status, their NYSESLAT results, strengths, areas of need, and next steps. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. a. In order to help students make progress, we utilize the following practices: ELLs are provided service by the ENL-Certified teacher through a Push-in/Pull-Out model. When in a pull-out session, ELLs are mainly placed in heterogeneous groups determined by grade level. Differentiated small-group instruction is provided based on initial and mid-year assessments as well as ongoing informal assessments done by the ENL teacher. The teacher also collaborates with the classroom teachers in order to be aware of, and plan for, the needs of the students in their regular classrooms. The integrated ENL component of the program is designed to build English language skills through content area instruction. It is delivered by a dually certified teacher or through co-teaching by a ENL certified teacher and a teacher certified in a content area. Integrated ENL includes content area subject matter and English language development using ENL strategies. All ELLs and former ELLs up to 2 years after exiting ELL status must receive a minimum number of units of integrated ENL. b. TBE program. If applicable. There is no TBE program at P.S. 11. c. DL program. If applicable. There is no Dual Language program at P.S. 11. 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? 2018-19 CEP 62  Entering and Emerging level students receive 360 minutes of ENL per week, 180 of which are Stand-Alone ENL and the other 180 Integrated ENL. Transitioning students receive 180 minutes of ENL, 90 which are Stand-Alone and 90 Integrated ENL. Expanding students receive 180 minutes of Integrated ENL. Former, or Commanding, ELLs will receive 90 minutes of Integrated ENL. A full-time ENL teacher creates the ENL schedule to meet the mandated minutes for each student. Native language support is provided through the Spanish language arts program as well as when appropriate and possible. Bilingual books are available to students to read in the ENL classroom. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. The classroom teacher provides instruction in the content areas using ENL methodologies and native language support if and when appropriate. The teachers scaffold the lessons with modeling, visual and dramatized contextual support, and Total Physical Response (TPR) . Beyond explicit ENL, collaboration between teachers means that there is a consideration for the language needs of ELLs. Some aspects of this policy include: 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? Students must be appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the school year if a school offers a Dual Language or Transitional Bilingual Program. This question, therefore, is not applicable to P.S. 11 as we do not offer TBE or DL based on parent choice. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status a. Students with Interrupted Formal Education [SIFEs] are students with interrupted, little or no formal education who are at least 2 academic years behind their age group. We currently have no students who are SIFE. Our plan for future SIFEs is to provide academic intervention services as an extension of the regular school program with both push-in and pull-out services. b. When a newcomer is registered in our school, we provide the following resources to facilitate the transition. c. Developing ELLs: d. Long term ELLs are ELLs who have been unable to achieve English proficiency on the NYSESLAT after their 6th year of ELL services. We currently have no Long Term ELLs. Our future action plan for this group involves: e. Our policy for former ELLs (up to two years after exiting the ENL program) is: 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? Teachers of ELLs and Students with Disabilities [SWDs] use a variety of instructional strategies and grade-level materials that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development. These include: 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? P.S. 11 exercises curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility in order to meet the diverse needs of ELLs and SWDs within the least restrictive environment. These needs are met through: 2018-19 CEP 63  8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. P.S. 11 has a structured RTI program available to all students who demonstrate a need for this service, including ELLs. Tier I Response to Intervention is provided by the classroom teachers in the general classroom setting. These interventions include differentiated instruction, small group or one-on-one instruction. Tier II of the Response to Intervention framework is provided by the SETTS/AIS teacher, who is also trained in the Wilson method and will provide targeted reading intervention to the students who require this support. Tier II intervention includes both push-in, co-teaching instruction as well as small group pull-out sessions. The focus is on literacy in both content areas as well as fiction. P.S. 11 also offers an extended-day academic intervention program on Thursdays. Using data from formal and informal assessments, teachers select students who require intervention services. These students are then provided with small-group instruction in their areas of deficits in the content area subjects. These after-school sessions run for 2.5 hours and focus on small-group instruction in areas of need, including ELA, math, and science. P.S. 11 also runs the Young Scholar Academy on Saturdays during which students are provided with additional support in ELA and math. Both the Thursday extended program and the Young Scholars Program are available to students, including ELLs, in grades 1-5. Studies have shown that proficiency in the native language aids in the acquisition of a second language. Therefore, all Spanish speaking ELLs, especially those who have never attended a Spanish language school, are encouraged to attend an after school Native Language Arts [NLA] program.There is also a Spanish language arts program available during the school day for students at P.S. 11. Spanish as well as Chinese classes are available as part of the enrichment program at P.S.11. Additionally, it is suggested that ELLs in grades 3-5 participate in after school programs geared to grade appropriate curricula and standardized exams. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? Two instructional coaches will be added to the staff of P.S. 11. These coaches, who have served as classroom teachers at the school, will focus on teacher and curriculum development. Their duties will include doing classroom demonstrations using best practices in order to provide training in teaching strategies, scaffolding etc., providing one-on-one teacher support, and helping teachers develop strong lesson plans. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? Not applicable to P.S. 11. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. Any programs available to monolingual students in the school are also available to ELLs. P.S.11 has several partnerships which enrich the lives of our students including New York Philharmonic. Boys to Men, Sister's Circle and I Am My Sister's Keeper are also supplemental services offered during school hours. ELLs are also encouraged to participate in extracurricular activities. The P.S. 11 P.T.A. offers an After-School Enrichment program for all students. The program offerings include: violin, Robotics, Spanish, Chinese, chess, tennis and soccer. The YMCA After School program is also popular with many of our students, including ELLs. The Thursday extended day program as well as the Saturday Young Scholars Academy provide additional academic support for students. Spanish-speaking pedagogues call parents of ELLs to encourage ELL participation in after-school programs. Family celebrations: Throughout the year, parents come to the school to take part in community celebrations including the Halloween Party, SpringFest, Curriculum Showcases, Spirit Week, and the Black History Month Celebration. At these events, the school and community come together to recognize student achievements in arts and academics. Translation and Interpretation Services: These services are offered to increase the involvement of limited English proficient parents. We have interpreters available at meetings with parents or are ready to call the Language Line at meetings with parents who speak a language other than English. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. In order to ensure that all ELLs are held to the same high expectations established in the Common Core Standards, ELLs are given the same learning opportunities and the same quality instructional materials the mainstream students use. The 2018-19 CEP 64  instructional materials that are used are appropriate for teaching ENL and are sensitive to the language and culture of the students. Along with using the "Common Core ELA Standards" and "The Teaching of Language Arts to Limited English Proficient/English Language Learners: Learning Standards for ESL," the ENL teacher integrates and scaffolds skills and strategies in the Reading and Writing curricula. An array of materials, both print and non-print, on a variety of levels are used. Leveled classroom libraries, genre based libraries, content based libraries (baskets for math, science and social studies), and computer based programs allow for differentiated instruction. During after-school, students performing at levels 1 and 2 on the NYS ELA or Math assessments use materials which specifically target the areas in which help is most needed. In ENL, students have access to such websites as www.starfall.com, www.pbskids.org and www.britishcouncil.org/kids. The Reading Eggs program, an interactive online program which supports each child’s learning by offering individual, one-on-one lessons that allow children to progress at their own rate, was purchased for use by the ENL program. This program focuses on a core reading curriculum of phonics and sight words using skills and strategies essential for sustained reading success. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Although the classroom and ENL teachers only use English for instruction, the student is provided native language support when the goal of the instruction is for the student to understand a concept or strategy. Classroom teachers who speak the native language are encouraged to provide native language support to their ELLs whenever appropriate and possible. English is used for instruction when language acquisition is the target. For example, when it important that the student understands the literacy skill to pay attention to how the character feels, the student is provided with a translation. However, when the goal is for the student to acquire the vocabulary of character feelings, instruction is provided in English and supported with visual diagrams or dramatic contextualization. Additionally, the students will express themselves in the language that would best support the lesson goal. For example, when the target is reading or writing stamina, the student will read or write in the language in which they can be most independent. However, when the task is to talk about their favorite part of a Read Aloud, they will listen to their English proficient partners modeling dialogue and reuse the language structures to express themselves in English, or may have accountable talk with a classmate who shares the same home language. Other native language supports include a bilingual library in the ENL classroom, bilingual dictionaries and use of a buddy system in which one student is able to translate information into the home language. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. When ELLs are serviced in the ENL classroom, the teacher abides by the ELA Common Core State Standards for the appropriate grade level as well as collaborates with the classroom teachers in order to support the students in their areas of highest need. We recognize that it is very important to have grade appropriate content for any level reader of every age. We have High-Interest Low-Level libraries in every classroom. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? P.S. 11 is a stand-alone school and does not share the building with any other schools. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). When students are registered over the summer, a staff member takes the family on a tour of the building and has an informal orientation touching on topics such as school policies, school uniform and necessary supplies. The parent and student have the opportunity to ask questions and meet the teacher if he or she is present. The parent coordinator will meet with the parents in order to answer questions pertaining to after-school programs, uniforms, school schedules, etc. During the school year, a newly enrolled ELL will have a buddy assigned to him/her who will ease the new student into the flow of the day as well as the culture of the school. This buddy system is set up by the ENL teacher in collaboration with the classroom teachers. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? The Spanish language arts program introduced several years ago will continue to provide students with Spanish language instruction during school hours. In addition, the after-school enrichment program offers Spanish and Chinese language courses for all students, including ELLs. 2018-19 CEP 65  18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? Not Applicable Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? In-house professional development at P.S. 11 is divided into two semesters, fall - September through December - and spring - January through June, The professional developments are further divided into operational and instructional sessions. Operational sessions, which staff attends as a whole group, focus on school policies while instructional sessions, which will be planned based on teacher ratings and observations, will be led by the instructional coaches and will take place in small groups. The Department of Education offers many professional development opportunities. Once the schedule is released for the 2017-2-18 school year, teachers will be chosen to attend these sessions and will then turn-key the information to the rest of the staff. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. Each school must provide professional development to all teachers and administrators that specifically addresses the needs of English language learners. A minimum of 15% of the required professional development hours for all teachers prescribed by CR Part 80 must be dedicated to language acquisition, including a focus on best practices for co-teaching strategies and integrating language and content instruction for English language learners. For all bilingual and ENL teachers, a minimum of 50% of the required professional development hours must be dedicated to language acquisition in alignment with core content area instruction, including a focus on best practices for co-teaching strategies and integrating language and content instruction for English language learners. The ENL teacher at P.S. 11attends several profession development sessions throughout the year in order to ensure that the school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2. These professional development opportunities include The English Language Learners with Special Needs cohort which will provide five professional development full-day sessions for teachers of ELLs. Teachers are also provided with professional development sessions focusing on ELLs including Cooperative Grouping and Effective Discussion Techniques - two sessions which focused on engaging ELLs and SWD in classroom instruction and discussion. Attendance is taken at each professional development and filed by the secretary in the main office of P.S. 11. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? Under the new teacher contract, Tuesday afternoons are scheduled parent meeting times. A letter will be sent out to all parents of ELLs at the beginning of the school year welcoming them and their students to the program. The letter will include the weekly time set aside for parent meetings should a parent request it. Meetings, if scheduled beforehand, can be held at 2018-19 CEP 66  other times during the week if the Tuesday time is not convenient to the parent/guardian. The ENL teacher has a open door policy and many parents stop by before or after school throughout the year to discuss any concerns and ask questions. If a parent/guardian should need translation services, meetings are scheduled during a time when a translator is available. The school has staff who are able to translate into Spanish, Chinese, Polish, Russian and Haitian-Creole. An Arabic-speaking volunteer has made herself available when the need arises for Arabic translation. Any other language needs are met through the DOE Translation and Interpretation services. Staff at schools must also individually meet with the parents or guardians of English language learners at least once a year, in addition to parent-teacher conferences, initial parent orientations, quarterly progress meetings or other scheduled meetings provided for parents or guardians, to discuss the goals of the program, their child’s language development progress, their child’s English language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas. This additional meeting will include the ENL teacher, the classroom teacher, and any other school staff necessary to sufficiently inform the parents or guardians about the child’s language development in all content areas in English. Should the parent require translation/interpretation services, a qualified interpreter/translator in the language or mode of communication the parent or guardian best understands will be present during the meeting. The ENL teacher, Ms. M. Miszczak, will schedule these meetings with parents of ELLs by sending a letter home towards the end of the year in the parents' preferred language in order to invite parents. Parents are given the option of coming on a Tuesday afternoon, the clerical day in June during which students are not in attendance, or a day and time that is most convenient for the parent. The ENL teacher keeps copies of the letters as well as attendance sheets from these meetings. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. The parents and teachers have formed a very active Parent Teacher Association at P.S.11. The Parent Coordinator facilitates workshops for parents throughout the year such as “Parent Teacher Conferences Prep,” “Common Core,” as well as math, ELA and test-prep workshops. The Principal and teachers also offer workshops for parents in the evenings. These include informational workshops on standardized exams as well as the Common Core Standards and their implications. Parents are invited to be active participants in their children’s education through monthly newsletters,which are translated into the parents’ native language if indicated on the Home Language Identification Survey [HLIS], the annual Curriculum Showcases, and various school assemblies. Teachers hold curriculum orientations and translators are made available for parents requesting the services. Parents are welcome to volunteer in the classroom. The Principal, Ms. Hope, also has monthly Town Hall meetings to keep parents abreast of school news and addresses any concerns the parents may have. There are also many fun activities for families throughout the year which boost school spirit and create a sense of community with the school. These include Family Ice-Skating Night, the Halloween Party, the Silent Auction, movie nights as well as a Parent Social. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. 2018-19 CEP 67 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Abidemi Hope, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 CEP 68  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: Purvis J. Behan School DBN: 13K011 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Abidemi Hope Title Principal Alain Beugoms Assistant Principal Clement Rand Parent Coordinator Marta Miszczak ENL/Bilingual Teacher Joshua Bloodworth Parent Oksana Savuk/Speech Teacher/Subject Area Salisha Jackson/Gen. Ed. Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach Diane Nathanial School Counselor Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 2018-19 CEP 69  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 13K011 School Name: Purvis J. Behan Superintendent: Barbara Freeman The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Marta Miszczak ENL Teacher/Coordinator Yes Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. All parents/guardians of newly enrolled students fill out a Home Language Identification Survey when enrolling their child. This form is maintained as part of the student’s record. If the parent/guardian indicates on the HLIS that they would like to receive information from the school in their home language, forms being sent home are translated either in written form or orally to the parent/guardian. Information from teachers is routinely translated to parents by staff members who speak the home language. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. 2018-19 CEP 70  Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral English Spanish Chinese (any) Arabic 792 9 4 2 97.6% 1.1% 0.49% 0.24% 783 12 4 4 96.5% 1.4% 0.49% 0.49% 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. There are no languages other than English not included in the list that represent at least a 10% population of P.S. 11. Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. Parent Teacher Conference Notice September, November, March, May DOE translated documents Entitlement Letters September DOE translated documents HLIS, Parent Choice Surveys September, throughout the year as necessary DOE translated documents NYSESLAT Testing Schedule April Staff translates in-house 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide Parent Teacher Conferences September, November, March, May Individual Parent Meetings May/June interpretation service(s)? Bilingual school personnel; Language Line if staff member who speaks the preferred language is unavailable B-lingual school personnel; Language Line if staff member who speaks the preferred language is unavailable. 2018-19 CEP 71  IEP Meetings Throughout the year as necessary Bilingual school personnel; Language Line if staff member who speaks the preferred language is unavailable. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. P.S. 11 has several strategies in place to reach limited-English-proficient parents in the event of a school emergency. The schools makes use of robocalls in order to inform parents of upcoming events, snow days, scheduling changes and can quickly send messages to inform them of an emergency. Finally, bilingual school staff is aware of, and have contact information for, those parents whose preferred language is other than English. A staff member who speaks the same language as the parent can contact them in the case of an emergency. If there is a parent who has a preferred language other than English and there is no staff member available who speaks that language, the school will makes use of the Language Line in order to quickly and efficiently communicate with the parents. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. The Language Access Coordinator, who has attended a training and who is knowledgeable of the goal of the Chancellor's Regulation A-663, will hold meetings with teachers in order to turn-key language access information to school personnel. The ENL teacher will furthermore make all teacher who have parents whose preferred language is other than English aware of the necessity of translating communications going home in the preferred language. The teachers will be provided with the Language Line telephone number as well as the information needed to request translation services from the Translation and Interpretation Unit. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) P.S. 11 strives to make Limited-English Proficient parents aware of their rights to receive information in their preferred language. The school has the multi-lingual poster displayed near the entrance to the building. Language ID cards are available at the security desk should they be needed. During registration, if a parent indicates that they prefer oral or written communication to be in a language other than English, the Language Access Coordinator is made aware of this fact. The LAC will speak to parents about their right to receive information in their preferred language. In addition, if the children of the parents who home language is other than English are ELLs, then parents once again are informed of their rights during the parent orientation that occurs within ten days of their child(ren) being administered the NYSITELL. 2018-19 CEP 72  Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? Parent surveys are distributed at the beginning of the year and give the school information on the types of supports and services parents would lie to see provided. Parents are then able to provide feedback on the quality and availability of services on the school's listserv, in the school's suggestion box, as well as with the classroom teachers. The ENL teacher also meets individually with all parents/guardians of ELLs and can then ascertain the needs and concerns that the parents may have. After such meetings, the ENL teacher confers with the parent coordinator and/or the classroom teachers in order to meet the needs and the parents/guardians as well as the students. P.S. 11 has a relatively small group of parents whose preferred language is other than English and the school works hard to meet their needs. There has never been feedback from parents requesting more than the language services already in place. 2018-19 CEP 73 
