2018-19 COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (CEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 22K014 School Name: J.H.S. 014 SHELL BANK Principal: TERI AHEARN 2018-19 CEP 1  Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 CEP 2  Section 1: School Information Page School Information School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: J.H.S 014 Shell Bank 332200010014 6, 7, 8 2424 Batchelder Street 718-743-0220 Phone Number: School Number (DBN): 22K014 718-769-8632 Fax: Teri Ahearn tahearn@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Geographical District: 22 Email Address: Teri Ahearn Lee Bryant TrenisseSutton Heather McCormick DaraRojas None None District Information Julia Bove Superintendent: 5619 FlatlandsAvenue Brooklyn, NY 11234 Superintendent’s Office Address: jbove@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718 968 6115 Phone Number: 718 958 6250 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) Brooklyn South MauriciereDe Govia FSC: Executive Director: 2018-19 CEP 3  Executive Director’s Office Address: 415 89th Street Brooklyn NY 11209 mdegovi@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 718 759-4862 Phone Number: 718 759 3909 Fax: 2018-19 CEP 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Teri Ahearn Lee Bryant TrenisseSutton Sarah Giglio Judy Citeta Colleen Glasheen Heather Mc Cormick MarcyLisboa *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/ Teacher Member/ Teacher Member/ Parent 2018-19 CEP 5  Dara Rojas FarrahBowlin Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Member/ Parent Member/Parent Member/Parent Member/Parent Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ 2018-19 CEP 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with 2018-19 CEP 7  the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement 2018-19 CEP 8  Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? At Shell Bank, we cater to diverse learners through individualized instruction. We build better writers and thinkers. Writing, speaking and listening are integrated throughout our curriculum with robust instruction. We are committed to producing productive citizens equipped to attain academic success in all areas of life. We strive to improve student achievement through all means of integration , equity, and inclusion for all of our learners. 2018-19 CEP 9  2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. At Shell Bank, we strive to have all students reach their fullest potential. We seek to build leaders of great character and to empower all students academically and socially. We have high expectations for achievement, personal conduct, and we motivate all to become lifelong learners who are confident, creative, and value individual differences while being positive influences in the community. Our school community is diverse, with large populations of English Language Learners and Student’s with Disabilities intertwined into every program we offer. Our school provides a well-planned transition program to help parents and students acclimate to the new requirements of middle school. Students at Shell Bank enjoy getting to know their teachers in a small group setting. Our program structure allows teachers, administrators, and guidance counselors to get to know students on an individual basis. Individual support is given to students and parents during their transitions through middle school years. Shell bank is the only school in District 22 with the Mutt i grees and Comfort Dog programs. Shell Bank piloted these programs, and they have grown to be a large part of our school culture. These are strong and effective social and emotional learning programs that help students deal with many personal, educational, interpersonal, and mental health issues enabling them to focus on academic issues more precisely. Shell Bank maintains unique programs that focus on college and career readiness, as well as an ongoing collaborative support system with parents. Our staff focuses on character development and civic responsibility, and offers experiences that are both intellectually and physically challenging. We incorporate a PBIS (positive behavioral intervention support) system school-wide, which has increased school spirit through activities such as volleyball games, “SOAR” buck redemption, and various school wide activities ( dress like a super hero, poster contests etc.). We are continuing several programs this year, including the “Omega” period into student schedules to address academic issues. The “Omega” period is a period set aside to have students work in small groups with a teacher to address academic delays or offer enrichment to those who are proficient. Students are grouped as homogeneously as possible based on specific deficits. The groups are periodically assessed to move students as needed, to make this an efficient and effective way to address needs and keep the student progressing forward as they meet their goals. We are also expanding our Google Classroom cohort to include grade 8. Teachers have been trained by our own in house Google trained "Google Educator" . The Google Education has been given complete certification through Google Corporation training. We are the only school in the district to have someone certified by Google for the program. This year we will be launching a project based learning course for students to be able to explore real world problems, gain skills and knowledge by working and investigating how to solve authentic, engaging and complex problems. A challenge that we face is getting the word out about all of the positive changes and activities that we have here. We continue to advertise our progress, and our programs. We continue to reach out to the neighborhood elementary schools, broadening our interactions with students and parents, and will continue to celebrate the accomplishments we have made over the past year. Something we work really hard on is getting parents involved. Currently we are initiating a program to invite parents in to review DRP scores, and develop SMART goals to help parents assist their children with their academics. We are creating active family engagement opportunities to increase family participation and involvement in our community. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. 2018-19 CEP 10  We have a very diverse student population at Shell Bank. We are the only barrier free building in the district, and that brings many students with physical handicaps to our school. These students are often in the general education classification, and their needs are met through adult assistance, nursing assistance, and some adaptations to lesson by our skilled staff. Our school is also home to many students with disabilities ranging from intellectually disabled, learning disabled, autistic, and other health impaired to students with multiple disabilities. Their needs are met through creation and implementation of quality IEPs, which are reviewed frequently to continue to meet the various needs of each student. We are also seeing a large increase in our ENL population. These students have diverse needs, including, but not limited to; language acquisition, acclimation to new cultures, and some academic delays. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. The areas that our school made the most progress in, according to the most recent data available, is in Strong Family and Community Ties. This was a focus for last year, and we made 4 % increase according to the 2017- 2018 School Quality Guide. In Rigorous Instruction, we met our target , and maintained our 84% positive rating. Highlights include that students feel that teachers want them to be better thinkers, and they are made to think more critically. Another area where we progressed is in Trust. We scored a 95 % parent-principal trust rating, and a 97 % teacher -principal trust rating. All of this was achieved through the work of our staff dedicated to the success of our Instructional Focus. Our focus for this year is increasing family engagement, and continuing our work to focus on the whole child through equity, access, inclusion, and dedication to the educational experience ( in an academically, emotionally, and health conscious manner) for all learners and the school community at large. 2018-19 CEP 11  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 22K014 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 06,07,08 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 525 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 98 97 11 10 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 9 9 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 91.0% % Attendance Rate 87.2% % Reduced Lunch 24.4% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.6% 16.6% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 28.0% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 4.96 0% 4% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 30.0% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A YES NO NO NO Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A NO NO NO NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A NO NO NO High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 65 66 90.2% 3.4% 24.8% 38.9% 14.9% 1.7% 4 26% 9 27.4% 32% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No YES NO N/A NO NO NO NO N/A NO NO YES N/A N/A YES NO N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 CEP 12  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year.  Based on the NYS Common Core 2017 ELA for all grades (6,7,8) 25% of students made proficiency (Level 3+4). This data reveals an upward trend of 5% when compared to the NYS 2016 ELA.  According to the 2017 School Performance Dashboard, 68% of ELLs made progress, surpassing the city average by 11 %.  The 2018 June Instructional Reports reveal an increase of 7 % in the 6th grade students’ ability to answer multiple choice questions correctly and an increase of 3% in constructed response questions.  The 2018 June Instructional Reports reveal an increase of 3 % in the 7th grade students’ ability to answer multiple choice questions correctly and an increase of 3 % in constructed response questions.  The 2018 Instructional Reports reveal a 1 % increase in the 8th grade students’ ability to answer multiple choice questions correctly but a decrease of 2% in constructed response questions.  According to the June Instructional reports for the 2018 ELA, our 6th grade students performed well with multiple choice questions pertaining to Common Core Standards RI.6.5, RL.6.2, RL6.6. Our 6th grade students showed less achievement in multiple choice questions based on Common Core Standards RI.6.6, RI.6.8, RL.6.5.  According to the June Instructional reports for the 2018 ELA, our 7th grade students performed well with multiple choice questions pertaining to Common Core Standards RI.7.3, RL.7.2, RL.7.3. Our 7th grade students showed less achievement in constructed response questions based on the Common Core Standards RI.7.5, RI.7.6, Rl.7.4.  According to the June Instructional reports for the 2018 ELA, our 8th grade students performed well with questions pertaining to Common Core Standards L.8.4, RL.8.3 (both multiple choice and constructed response type questions) Our 8th grade students showed less achievement in constructed response questions based on the Common Core Standards RI.8.6 & RL.8.6, which both focus on determining the author's point of view or purpose in a test and acknowledges and respond to conflicting evidence or viewpoints.  According to the June 2018 DRP Tracking document our students showed an overall 4 point increase in in reading levels.  According to the June 2018 DRP Tracking document our English Language Learners showed an overall 2 point increase in in reading levels.  According to the June 2018 DRP Tracking document our students showed an overall 4 point increase in in reading levels.  According to the June 2018 DRP Tracking document our students with disabilities showed an overall 2 point increase in in reading levels. 2018-19 CEP 13  Informed by Capacity Framework Element-Rigorous Instruction, current data, and school based student work analysis, there is a need to continue to support students to increase their ability to comprehend grade-level common core aligned text and so that they are able to respond to questions, using details, and relevant information from text for support. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June, 2019- there will be a 2% growth in ELA proficiency( level 3 and 4), across grade levels, as evidenced by the NYS ELA exam. 2018-19 CEP 14  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Visible Thinking strategies, Close reading strategies across content areas, Gradual Release Responsibility, Restate, answer, Cite, Expand-(R.A.C.E), and small group instruction, Just Words program and Wilson program. Individualized instruction when needed in Omega. Teachers will use our well developed and challenging curriculum. Google Classroom will be expanded to include grade 6, 7, & 8 seamlessly infusing technology into the classroom and home. These strategies are used consistently, and are school wide. Strategies for SWD’s and ENL’s and lowest third Universal Design for Learning, modifications to meet IEP goals, revisiting IEPs and lesson plan modifications to address ENL language deficits. Strategies are used consistently , in each lesson, as appropriate. Project Happen after school program for ENLs. Saturday program for ENLs and MLLs. Translated professional development for parents based on the Common Core Standards. Weekly time set aside to address individual needs of students with the parents Meet the staff night to introduce curriculum maps and pacing. This is done in September, and again in May. Homework help books sent home . Teacher/Parent meetings to address needs of specific students, these meetings are on Tuesdays, or by appointment. Communication and support of the implementation of the strategies needed to carry out our Instructional Focus Sharing of best practices through inter-visitation and and Ambassadors turn key. Turn key is the Monday after the Ambassador meeting. Sharing of best practices is on going, and discussed in common planning Tuesday sessions throughout the year. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All students Start-September 2018, end- June 2019 Administration, all content area teachers. Start September, 2018, End- June 2019 Special Education students, English Language Learners, Lowest third Administration, content area teachers with students with disabilities, ELL’s and struggling students. SIT TEAM Parents, guardians and families Start September 2018, end- June 2019 All teachers, administration, Parent Coordinator, and Parent’s Association and guidance department. All staff and school community. September 2018- June 2019 All staff and school community, including Ambassadors. 2018-19 CEP 15  3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. We will continue using out Tuesday Family Engagement sessions to increase family involvement. We will be offering content and and sub group specific workshops, creating school community teams to facilitate out reach to our families. We have a Saturday program planned to reach out to parents and students to increase parent awareness of school activities and student educational needs. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. MSQI grant, Title III grant for ENL parent workshops, incorporating scheduling practices to include small group instruction (Omega period). Use of “F” status teacher to increase access for those students who are struggling in the content areas. Parent coordinator scheduling parent meetings and workshops both in school and in places throughout NYC. Common planning periods, LASW, and use of contractual time for parents. Assignment of paraprofessionals to meet the needs of students most appropriately. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A X C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. The midpoint benchmark will be the DRP exam given in January 2019. Student writing progress will be monitored using the results of the common core aligned on-demand writing tasks showing 3% growth in DRP score by January 2019. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) Review of DRP data. Tracking of student growth determined by DRP comparison from September base to January exam. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 16  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? Based on the School Quality Snapshot (2017- 2018 SY) 88% responded positively to questions about guidance /social emotional support, 76% of the students reported that they felt safe in the building. The area in which we received the least favorable responses was in classroom behavior and the perception of bullying behavior. We will be concentrating on professional development for teachers in the areas of positive behavioral intervention, RtI, and classroom management skills to improve student experience in the classrooms. Bullying awareness will be addressed through assemblies with guest speakers from the NYPD, and class workshops given by guidance counselors, SAPIS and guest speakers. We support the whole child with our structured social emotional learning environment. Comfort dogs, and Muttigrees are two programs that teach students how to cope, and how to deal with life situations. Our guidance department was given high rankings on the survey, and the individualized attention we are able to provide for our students helps them to succeed emotionally and academically. Teacher teams and staff establish a culture for learning that systematically communicates a unified set of high expectations for all students and provide a clear, focused and effective feedback and guidance/advisement supports to ensure that students, including high need subgroups, own their educational experience and are prepared for the next level. We feel our school leaders and staff effectively communicate expectations connected to a path to college and career readiness and successfully partner with families to support student progress toward those expectations. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, responses will increase by 10% for students responding positively to questions on classroom behavior. 2018-19 CEP 17  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? PBIS sustained school wide. SOAR bucks to redeem for student chosen awards. All students September 2018- June 2019 Administration and all school community , Peer Mentoring, Leaders and Restorative Circles programs to promote ● respect, cooperation, and fostering maturity and proper choices. ● Urban Advantage “CHOICE” periods built into the schedule for students- examples of programs are: Muttigrees, Student Government, Cheerleading, Debate Team, Dynamic readers, Art, Sports Leadership, and , Drama. Programs such as Peer Mentoring, Project Happen, Sports Leadership, Muttigrees and Comfort Dog, all address the specific needs of SWD’s and ELL’s. The programs are designed to target social emotional issues and are organized to close the language gap through movement and example. Google classroom to boost engagement. Students with disabilities, English Language Learners Urban advantage is a program that allows for parents to be involved in the community through free vouchers and experience the Arts and Cultural opportunities in the City of New York. ELL cultural day involves the ELL parent community with the school. Parents of SWDs and ELL’s, as well as all parents The student voice contributes to the variety of programming and activities to keep students interested in school. Teachers are sensitive to the needs of students, and are sure to reward students for good behaviors with SOAR bucks. All students September 2018- June 2019 Project Happen is three days per week, Muttigrees is once per week . Others are ongoing as needed. September 2018-September 2019 - Once bimonthly on Saturdays. September 2018- June 2019 Teachers of Choice programs, Google classroom, and administration and guest speakers. Molly and Brody Administration, Parent Coordinator, Parent’s association and teachers. Student government and teachers 2018-19 CEP 18  3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. We will hold workshops and incorporate topics into PA meetings and SLT to engage families. Administrators, parent coordinator and guidance personnel will monitor and create agendas based on parent input and school perceived needs. These activities will be planned throughout the year, and incorporate flexible timing to meet the needs of all stakeholders. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Programming to include CHOICE programs, Leaders, and Restorative Circles. Time set aside for meetings with student government, release time for those teachers involved with the Urban Advantage program, Training for staff on the use of Google Classroom to increase cohort for 2018 school year. Intervention for classroom issues that arise - addressing student classroom behavior and training teachers to effectively manage behavior in their own classrooms. Structures to be put into place for positive behavior in the classroom. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Progress monitoring will take place in February. Students will complete a survey though the blog. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Survey created by school. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 19  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. According to the 2017- 2018 ratings, the average score was 3.03, which is Effective, for professional responsibility. According to the School Quality Guide, 83 % of teachers responded positively to innovation and collective responsibility. “While teachers have collaboratively developed common assessments and rubrics aligned with the school’s curricula, they do not always use the resulting data from student work analysis to determine student progress toward goals across grades and subjects.” “Actionable feedback that is rubric-based is provided to students across classrooms. Students use this feedback to improve their work. However, there are missed opportunities to use data analysis to adjust curricula and instruction.” Informed by Capacity Framework Element-Collaborative Teachers and current data there is a need to provide training for tteachers on best practices concerning professional responsibility in regards to using data to drive instruction. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June, 2019, 95% of teachers will increase their rating in Component 4e- Professional Responsibility . Teachers will meet in teams to turn key information to improve professional practice and staff collaboration and community outreach. 2018-19 CEP 20  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Professional Development Committee and a professional development plan. Structured professional learning time and structured common planning time to provide training for teachers on best practices concerning timely use of data to empower teachers to take responsibility for their own professional growth. Google Classroom training and retraining. All teachers September 2018- June 2019 PD committee and administration. Google Classroom trained Educator. We offer PDs given by in house experts in Special Education and English Language Learners. Out of building PDs to be used as needed for those teachers who request additional learning All teachers Meet the Staff Night, teachers are normed in curriculum and assessments. Notifications to parents about meetings and changes in curriculum due to revisions. Parents The collaboration of administration and staff to produce a professional development plan. Teachers, and administration September 2018- June 2019 September 2018- June 2019 September 2018- June 2019 Special Education teachers and ELL teachers and Administration Parent Coordinator, Parent’s Association, Administration and teachers. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. We ill use our Tuesday Family engagement time, create Saturday workshops to meet needs of parents. Parents will be invited to SLT, PA meetings, and through social media outlets. Monitoring will be systematic on a monthly basis. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Professional development plan, time set aside after school for meeting with all stakeholders. Parent Coordinator outreach, and funds used for trips, meetings, and needs decided by families. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant 2018-19 CEP 21  C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. In January 2019, the administration will tabulate all teachers’ scores in 4e to check on progress using Advance. Effective evaluation of all PDs attended by teachers ( and who turnkeyed their learning ) Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Advance website data. Survey by administration on Professional Development attendance. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 22  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Our strengths are: We scored above the NYC average in Effective School Leadership in all categories except inclusive principal leadership ( rated by parents) , for that we received a rating of 93%. 100%of teachers agreed or strongly agreed that at their school, once they start a new program, they follow up to make sure that it’s working. 100%of teachers agreed or strongly agreed that at their school it is clear how all of the programs offered are connected to their school's instructional vision. 100%of teachers agreed or strongly agreed that at their school curriculum, instruction, and learning materials are all well coordinated across the different grade levels. On the Framework for Great Schools report we received a 4.04 out of 4.99 for effective school leadership. Informed by Capacity Framework Element- Effective School Leadership and current data there is a need to continue to lead change at the community level, nurture the leadership development of others, and help keep parents informed about goals and developments in the building. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2018 we will have 95 % of parents responding positively to questions relating to Principal Inclusive Leadership from the School Quality Guide. 2018-19 CEP 23  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Professional development to support teachers using Danielson data. Use of inter-visitations to support teacher practice and effectiveness. Providing support material and direct feedback. Administration, teachers September 2018 June 2019 Professional development to support UDL and multiple entry points. Inter-visitations to share best practices. All teachers September 2018 June 2019 Administration, Effectiveness Coach, and teachers rated as highly effective Ambassadors, administration and teachers rated highly effective Workshops to help parent understand the APPR process- translated as necessary. Meetings woith Principal to facilitate parent understanding of building activities, curriculum and changes. Parents and school community Spring 2019 Parent Coordinator, Parent’s Association, SLT team. Principal Continue the “open door policy” for teacher inter-visitation. Teachers September 2018 June 2019 Ambassadors, and teachers rated highly effective 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. We have a new SLT with monthly parent association meetings. Parents are able to hear outcome from leadership meetings, and they are able to have their voices heard. Administrators , parent coordinator and guidance personal will keep in contact with parents through email, notices, and phone contact top clarify any issues or questions parents may have . Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. MSQI coach, District Ambassador program, programming for inter-visitations Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy Title I SWP Title I TA Title II, Part A Title III, Part A X Title III, Immigrant 2018-19 CEP 24  C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February, 2019, a survey will be creatred for the parents to check for level of satisfaction of principal leadership. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Survey created by school, and SLT members. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 25  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Based on the 2018 Quality Guide 93% responded positively ( parents & teachers) about teacher outreach to parents. We did not meet target for parent involvement in school. We scored a 78 % positive response for that area,. Responses are poor for when they have been asked or had the opportunity to volunteer time to support their school (for example, spent time helping in classrooms, helped with school-wide events, etc.) . Informed by Capacity Framework Element-Strong Family and Community Ties and current data there is a need to increase the amount of in school events offered to parents/guardians. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 85% of parents/guardians state that they have been asked or had the opportunity to volunteer time to support their school as measured by the School Quality Guide. 2018-19 CEP 26  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Use of group emails to parents, monthly school newsletter, monthly calendar and school messenger to inform parents and school community of upcoming school events, performances, trips, workshops, and programs. Weekly teacher phone calls/meetings with parents. Parents and school community September 2018- June 2019 All materials to go to homes will translated appropriately. Secondary notices sent closer to events. Events included in Agenda and discussions for meetings. Parents and school community September, 2018- June 2019 Planning activities to involve parents: Game Night, Mother/Daughter and Father/ Son Luncheon, and ELL Cultural Workshops. Use of group emails to parents, monthly school newsletter, monthly calendar and school messenger to inform parents and school community of upcoming school events, performances, trips, workshops, and programs. Weekly teacher phone calls/meetings with parents Administration, Parents and school community September, 2018- June 2019 Creation of the Family Involvement Team. Committee for finding ways to get parents/families involved and participating at school. Parents and school community September, 2018- June 2019 Inviting parents to the planning stages of events to foster ownership of school community. Implementing ideas from parents to improve school/home communication. Parents and school community September, 2018 June 2019 Parent Coordinator, administration, Parent’s Association and SLT team. Parent Coordinator, administration, Parent’s Association and SLT team. Parent Coordinator, administration, Parent’s Association and SLT team. Parent Coordinator, administration, teachers, Parent’s Association and SLT team. Parent Coordinator, administration, Parent’s Association and SLT team. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. We partner with Millennium Community Based Organization in an effort to strengthen strong family - community ties. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment 2018-19 CEP 27  Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Planning multiple meetings to meet the needs of working parents. Using parent funds to offer refreshments to parents for meetings and events. Offering per session for staff to assist with events and meetings. Guidance counselor intervention and SAPIS involvement to meet needs of families in specific areas ( crisis, attendance, lateness, substance abuse, adolescent issues, mental health etc). Outreach to city/community organizations. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, a parent survey will show an increase in parents stating that they are invited to school for functions Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. School created Parent survey Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 28  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) MSQI program, Visible Thinking Protocol, R.A.C.E, scaffolding, differentiation, UDL, Independent Reading Program, Just Words, Wilson. Modeling, differentiation, use of manipulatives. Increase Google Classroom Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) Small group instruction, tutoring sessions, one on one sessions When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) During the school day, before and after school. Small group instruction, tutoring sessions, one on one sessions During the school day, before and after school. Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Proficiency level on NYS ELA exam, DRP, teacher observation, classroom assessment. Proficiency level on the NYS Math test, NYC assessment tests, teacher observation, classroom observation Teacher observations, class assessments, notebook review Teacher observations, class assessments, notebook review Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Mathematics Science Social Studies At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Re-teaching, differentiation, scaffolding, alternate modality Small group instruction, tutoring sessions, one on one sessions Re-teaching, differentiation, scaffolding, alternate modality Small group instruction, tutoring sessions, one on one sessions During the school day, before and after school. During the school day, before and after school. Throughout school day, after school through outsourcing Recommendations of staff, parent, outside services Small group, one on one, outside resources Small group, one on one, outside resources 2018-19 CEP 29  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) Currently we have 12 students in temporary housing. 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. STH students have attendance outreach, financial support, guidance intervention, and after school programs. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 CEP 30 Students receive financial support of supplies, trips, and activities 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. N/A 2018-19 CEP 31  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. All new staff is interviewed and placed according to license, experience, and where appropriate, interest. Professional development is selected through teacher request, and through use of advance data and observation. Observations and walkthroughs are frequent, and feedback is always given in a timely manner. Assistance and support are ongoing for all staff through administration, and the TDEC. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). Professional Development is offered on a weekly as well as an as needed basis. Paraprofessionals have their own professional development opportunities given by school staff, including other paraprofessionals. Teachers and paraprofessionals are given the opportunity to attend professional development offered by the Network and by other agencies to improve practice and learn new initiatives. Ambassadors turnkey important practices learned at Network meetings, and administration attends professional development to integrate new practices and improve all levels of school environment. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). 2018-19 CEP 32  N/A Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). N/A 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. We use the MOSL committee and the Professional Learning committee. The MOSL group looks at the assessments and their usage, and the Professional Learning committee creates a yearly professional development plan. Both committees are made up of teachers and administrators and they collaborate to ensure alignment to CCLS, are committed to the success of their classrooms and the school. Teachers refine assessments based on LASW. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Column B Section Reference(s) Page 9, 15, 20 Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Federal Federal Federal 420,796 0 17,742 x 2018-19 CEP 33  Title III, Immigrant Federal Tax Levy (FSF) Local 0 3,972,507 x x Page 9, 20 Page 9, 12, 15, 17 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs. 2018-19 CEP 34   Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 CEP 35  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. The Shell Bank School, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. I.S 14 will support parents and families of Title I students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; 2018-19 CEP 36  ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; The school’s Parent Involvement Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in 2018-19 CEP 37  the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) School-Parent Compact (SPC) Shell Bank , in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for 2018-19 CEP 38  improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; 2018-19 CEP 39  ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities 2018-19 CEP 40  ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; 2018-19 CEP 41  ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 2018-19 CEP 42 Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components: 1. 2. 3. The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers. Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. 1. 2. 3. 4. High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” 1. Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences. Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. 1. These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 3 9 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 5 11 12 2018-19 CEP 43  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information 2 2 0 Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the · · · · · · rationale subgroups and grade levels of students to be served schedule and duration language of instruction # and types of certified teachers types of materials Begin description here: Of the 134 current English Language Learners at Shell Bank, 23 ELLs are classified as Entering, 24 ELLs are classified as Emerging, 41 ELLs are classified as Transitioning, and 48 ELLs are classified as Expanding based on the 2018 NYSESLAT and recent NYSITELL results. 92 Ells are Newcomers, 31 ELLs are developing, and we have 11 Long-Term ELLs. Current data supports that our direct instruction supplemental program target our large population of Entering and Emerging ELLs in all grades (6, 7,& 8) to provide instruction in English with home language support, emphasizing English language acquisition. The ENL team supporting these students are ENL licensed pedagogues. These pedagogues will will use the NYC EDAT to drive planning, programming, and instruction. Using information obtained from the EDAT, our teachers will obtain data that will help them support of the needs of each English Language Learner. During the after-school program, teachers will differentiate instruction to meet the needs of ELLs. To support our English as a New Language (ENL) program after school, two ENL licensed pedagogues will teach 25 ELLs in each during their direct instruction class, which will be held in English with native language support, on Wednesdays and Thursdays from 2:05pm to 4:35 pm. Instruction will begin the second week of October and end the first week of March, a total of 37 days. Our program, “Project Happen,” will consist of 50 students. A supervisor will be not be paid from the Title III funds because “Project Happen” will be taking place under the supervision of the on-site after-school program currently established in the building.Our licensed ENL pedagogues will differentiate instruction for the students based on their needs using two instruction Programs named Skill Sharperners and MaxScholar. Skills Sharpeners is a supplemental program exclusively used for the after-school program four-level series is structured to target various degrees of English language proficiency and assist English Language Learners in achieving academic success in four modalities: Listening, Speaking, Reading and Writing. Lessons will integrate English and include comprehensive treatment of language structures, higher-order thinking skills, and writing skills. The Skill Sharpeners series supports English Language Learning in the content areas and skills are integrated with academic content in social studies, science, math, and history. Students interpret graphs and charts, read maps, solve math word problems, and learn library and study skills. With this program, students sharpen comprehension skills as they read about history, science, and American culture and they deepen their understanding of basic English structure. MaxScholar is an online blended learning system that is a personalized approach to learning. This reading intervention program is systematic, explicit, and multi-sensory, based on the research based methods of the Orton-Gillingham approach, the Lindamood-Bell Process©, and other phonics, and reading comprehension strategies. Programs embedded in the learning system were created to help students who are struggling to learn to read and suitable for English Language Learners. Programs within MaxScholar include: MaxPhonics, MaxReading, 2018-19 CEP 44  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information MaxWords, MaxMusic, MaxVocab, MaxPlaces, and MaxBios. The programs are systematic, explicit, and multi-sensory, based on the research-based methods of the Orton-Gillingham approach, the Lindamood-Bell Process©, and other phonics, and reading comprehension strategies. They are adaptable to the student’s age and language needs, and are accessible on any computer or tablet. Each program within Maxscholar targets specific areas of English language acquisition.MaxPhonics features:• “worlds,” which allows students to focus either on individual letters, blends or digraphs.• practice for handwriting, an essential part of reading.• Videos that demonstrate the correct pronunciation of letters, blends and digraphs.• Drill and practice to help the students build important skills.• Fun games to reinforce what they have learned.MaxReading features:• Thirteen levels of difficulty, each with several multi-chapter books.• Relevant topics for students of different ages and with a variety of interests.• Electronic highlighters that help visually identify important parts of the text.• Vocabulary presented in context.• Comprehension questions following every chapter.• Opportunity to outline and summarize each chapter after reading.• “Read Aloud” featureMaxWords Features:• Latin Roots and Greek Roots.• Prefixes and Suffixes• Spelling Rules.• Syllabication: CLOVER.MaxMusic uses music and games to engage students who might otherwise be uninterested in reading and learning. Students can play fun learning games to work on memory, recognition and auditory skillsMaxVocab is MaxScholar's dictionary. It is one of the most important complements of our MaxReading Program. MaxVocab offers thousands of definitions and interactive games to expand the students’ vocabulary.With MaxPlaces, students get the chance to explore the world. After choosing a city or attraction from the world map, the student reads a short passage filled with information about the chosen place and then answers a series of multiple choice questions to check for reading comprehension.MaxBios introduces students to famous personalities, both past and present, from around the world through biographies. Each biography is set up in a time line structure, which teaches the students chronological ordering skillsMaxScholar’s dashboard, or administrative site, is where teachers use the tools and resources necessary for proper implementation and monitoring of MaxScholar. MaxReports is a reporting system that gives ENL teachers valuable data in order to properly monitor and assess students’ needs.Home Language Support: Teachers will use materials (art supplies, technology, etc.) to give ELLs opportunities to practice oral language skills and express themselves creatively. Teachers will use pictures and real world objects to teach ELLs basic words. ELLs will have access to word to word dictionaries for home language translation. Teachers will help ELLs make meaningful connections to new vocabulary and content being taught by helping them find way to connect their personal experience to new content. Teachers will make family connections and ask families of ELLs to share information about their experiences, background and interests. ELLs will be paired with peers who speak their language. Teachers will label objects and areas of the room in various languages. The ENL teachers will maintain agendas, attendance sheets, and the program notification in parents' preferred languages in a binder located in the ENL office.Students will be formatively assessed using MaxScholar data reports as well as the Degrees of Reading Power (DRP) assessment. The DRP is a summative, criterion-based reading comprehension assessment that measures how well a student understands expository texts. It will be administered three times a year (September, January, and June.) 2018-19 CEP 45  rationale teachers to receive training schedule and duration topics to be covered name of provider Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. · · · · · Begin description here: ENL teachers will receive ongoing professional development and support from MaxScholar agents. Starting with a welcome back Webinar in the Fall, our teachers Ms. Tiflinsky and Ms. Jeffries will have a refresher class on the MaxScholar program. As we use MaxScholar in the supplemental program, we receive emails with materials to prepare teachers for the training. These materials include teaching resources, informational documents, and a list in order to generate accounts for students and teachers. Technology and literacy agents from MaxScholar continuously supports the ENL teachers with on-line and in-person visits. The MaxScholar team plans to visit our school one day in the fall to support the teachers that will be using the software. The MaxScholar team will go through all the steps of the different programs, games, apps, and reports. The Technology agent will assist in the creation and or renewal of user-names and passwords so students can access the MaxScholar system. A MaxScholar agent will make a monitoring visit will take place in the winter. The MaxScholar team will schedule one, two-hour follow-up professional learning meeting in the winter with our teachers to ensure fidelity and proper implementation to guarantee that our students get the best possible results out of the MaxScholar learning experience. The ENL teachers will maintain agendas and attendance sheets in a binder located in the ENL office. rationale schedule and duration topics to be covered name of provider how parents will be notified of these activities Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. · · · · · Begin description here: With Title III funding, all parents of ELLs are given a meaningful opportunity to participate in their child’s education program. Success for English Language Learners can be achieved by creating a culturally responsive, positive environment for parent engagement. Ms. Tiflinsky, and Ms. Jeffries our ENL specialists will conduct workshops to support parent engagement on a quarterly basis as indicated below. Parent workshops will be provided on Saturdays to support our ENL parents’ request for weekend activities. The workshops will be held on 4 Saturdays during the school year and funding will support two teachers for 2.5 hours. The ENL teachers will maintain agendas, attendance sheets, and the invitations in parents’ preferred languages in a binder located in the ENL office. Plans for family workshops include but are not limited to: First Quarter: · Learners and how our ENL program integrates the school’s instructional focus and the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards.&nbsp; Meet the ENL teachers and learn the academic requirements of English Language 2018-19 CEP 46  Supporting families to navigate their path to becoming a U.S. Citizen. Dream, Believe, And Succeed! We will provide parents of ELLs an overview and a How to navigate the N.Y.C school system and understand the flow of the school day for Families&nbsp; will also be supported on how to have productive How can families&nbsp;support the social development of our youth?&nbsp; Families of the long-term ELLs will be provided guidance on the how to assist in the What do the NY State Exams mean for ELLs?&nbsp; Parents will explore the components of the NYSESLAT, ELA and New York State Math Part D: Parental Engagement Activities · ELLs. · teacher&nbsp;conferences and their rights as parents/guardians. Meet the ENL teachers and learn the academic requirements of English Language Learners and how our ENL program integrates the school’s instructional focus and the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. How to navigate the N.Y.C school system and understand the flow of the school day for ELLs. Families will also be supported on how to have productive teacher conferences and their rights as parents/guardians. Second Quarter: · · educational development of their child at home.&nbsp; · How can families support the social development of our youth? Families of the long-term ELLs will be provided guidance on the how to assist in the educational development of their child at home. Supporting families to navigate their path to becoming a U.S. Citizen. Third Quarter: · · exam. &nbsp; · College Planning Handbook for English Language Learners and their Families What do the NY State Exams mean for ELLs? Parents will explore the components of the NYSESLAT, ELA and New York State Math exam. Dream, Believe, And Succeed! We will provide parents of ELLs an overview and a College Planning Handbook for English Language Learners and their Families Fourth Quarter: · students.&nbsp; &nbsp; · Language Learners annual accomplishments&nbsp; We will celebrate our diverse cultures as ELL parents share native dishes and students showcase their class work Parents are encouraged to attend the NYC Middle School Cultural Festival with the students. Culture, Cooking, Connections and Celebration. Celebrating our English Language Learners annual accomplishments We will celebrate our diverse cultures as ELL parents share native dishes and students showcase their class work In addition to translated invitations, we will notify families of ELLs about our Family Engagement Activities using our school-based translators and the over-the-phone interpretation services. We will also utilize our Parent Coordinator to communicate family engagement opportunities with parents/guardians via email and electronically update families on activities in their native language. Parents are encouraged to attend the NYC Middle School Cultural Festival with the Culture, Cooking, Connections and Celebration.&nbsp; Celebrating our English 2018-19 CEP 47 Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits) 1. 2. Purchased services 1. Per session Per diem High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials 2. Must be supplemental. Additional curricula, instructional materials. Must be clearly listed. 3. 4. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL 2018-19 CEP 48  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 22 School Name Shell Bank - I.S. 14 Borough Brooklyn School Number 014 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Teri Ahearn Coach type here ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Ella Tiflinsky Marilyn Jeffrie Teacher/Subject Area Meliha Choudhury Teacher/Subject Area type here Related-Service Provider Vicky Dreifus Superintendent Julia Bove Assistant Principal Theresa Morgan-Turchiano Coach type here School Counselor Jennifer Serio Parent Sara Giglio Parent Coordinator Tina Maffeo Field Support Center Staff Member Natalie Hemmings-Noble Other (Name and Title) type here C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 1 2 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 574 2018-19 CEP 49 Total number of ELLs 157 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 27.35%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 1 2 4 3 0 0 0 0 0 0 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? We use the results of the NYSITELL and NYSESLAT exams as our first tool to assess the early literacy skills of our ELLs. Also, we use the DRP (Degrees of Reading Power) as a measurement program that helps our ENL educators understand each student’s English reading comprehension ability. These test scores are reported on a scale of text complexity that identifies how well the student is able to read at the instructional level and at the independent level. With this data from Degrees of Reading Power, our ENL teachers have the tools to differentiate instruction in the classroom. Our ENL teachers also use data from our MaxScholar program. MaxScholar is a systematic, explicit, and multi-sensory, based on the research-based methods of the Orton-Gillingham approach, the Lindamood-Bell Process©, and other phonics, and reading comprehension strategies. They are adaptable to the student’s age and need, and are accessible on any computer or tablet. Weekly reports are sent right to the ENL teachers’ e-mail inbox so they can see how their class has progressed. Teachers are also able to log-in to their MaxScholar dashboard to obtain data reports for each student. Teachers are able to look at and analyze the students work online, as well as their reading comprehension scores. Based on the results 2018-19 CEP 50  of our various ongoing summative assessments, teachers determine the implications for planning and identify effective teaching strategies to assist the needs of each student. Through the use of use informal and formal assessments throughout the year, teachers make adjustments when necessary to meet the needs of each student. Embedded in our curricula program, all content area teachers administer performance tasks at the completion of each unit. All teachers meet and look at student work using the National School Reform Faculty ATLAS- Learning from Student Work Protocol. This protocol guides groups of teachers to discover what the students understand and how they are thinking. Teachers keep portfolios of student work, and they share these materials with their colleagues during Common Prep Planning Meetings and their informal conversations with other teachers 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? The DRP is administered 3 times a year (Fall, Winter, and Spring) to monitor ELL progress. Teachers are provided timely data reports indicating the DRP score of each ELL. Teacher teams meet to analyze the data and make instructional adjustments. Our MaxScholar data is available at all times using the online dashboard. In addition, teachers receive email notification from MaxSchoar of updated weekly data. The administration receives monthly data reports via email. Other formative assessments are embedded into lesson planning and monitored by the administration. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? We use data from MaxScholar, the DRP assessment, and ELL periodic assessments to evaluate student progress in our ESL program throughout the school year to make necessary adjustments. Through data inquiry teams, our staff analyzes data trends in all the New York State exams in regard to English Language Learners. We also evaluate the success of our programs for ELLs based on the accountability reports such as the NYC Progress Report and our State Report Card. Finally, using the NYC EDAT report, we review multiple sources of student achievement data, get an overview of ATS reports necessary to customize our schools report and develop knowledge necessary to utilize the ELL Data Analysis Tool (EDAT) to drive planning, programming, and instruction. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? The ENL team meets to analyze data at our weekly meetings. Using our Looking at Data protocol, we look at data to identify trends, analyze the instructional implications of these trends to collaboratively develop instructional and administrative plans needed to impact student achievement. Our work is disseminated to the school community and used by teachers and administrators to make instructional decisions. Interventions range from student placement into enriched programs to remediate programs. The school schedule has been developed so that individual needs can be met during the OMEGA period aka “get what you need” program. Furthermore, LTE and SIFE students are pulled for targeted instruction. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] N/A 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. NYSESLAT, NYSITELL, ELL Benchmark Exams, ELA, and Math state exams are used to place students into appropriate programs on an ongoing basis. We have been experiencing a rapid increase in ELL enrollment for the past few years. With the expectation that this trend will continue, our school schedules, student placement, and teacher schedules have been adjusted to accommodate the growing ELL population of ELLs. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? At the end of the school year the ENL team looks at data to determine the current and potential ENL levels for current ELLs (6th and 7th grade ELLs) for the following school year. Students are placed in future classes based on the team’s assessment. Using this information, the principal is informed of instructional schedules and staffing needed to accommodate the mandates of our English as a New Language program. When the updated NYSESLAT scores are available in August, the Assistant Principal, gathers results to ensure that students are placed in the appropriate program for the first day of school. 2018-19 CEP 51  Students are programmed in STARS to ensure compliance. Students who enroll during the school year are placed in the appropriate program based on the HLIS, interview process, and ultimately using the results of the NYSITELL. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. Our Freestanding English as a new language (ENL) program provides instruction in English with home language support, emphasizing English language acquisition. Students in our freestanding ENL program come from many different language backgrounds, and English may be the only common language among the students. As per CR Part 154, students who are programmed according to their English Proficiency level. Students scoring at Entering and Emerging levels receive instruction in the stand-alone program. Minutes in this program are appropriate to the CR Part 154 mandates. Instruction in the stand-alone ENL program develops English language skills so that students can succeed in core content courses. It is delivered by one of our certified ENL teachers. Our students do not receive stand-alone ENL in lieu of core content area instruction. All ELLs and former ELLs up to 2 years after exiting ELL status receive a minimum number of units of integrated ENL. Instruction in our integrated ENL program builds English language skills through content area instruction. Integrated ENL is delivered by either a dually certified teacher (ENL and a content area) or co-taught by a certified ENL teacher and a certified content area teacher (i.e., English language arts, math, science, or social studies). Both methods of integrated ENL instruction include content area subject matter and English language development using ENL strategies. b. TBE program. If applicable. N/A c. DL program. If applicable. N/A: 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? All ELLs receive their required number of units of ENL based on their proficiency level, regardless of their program placement. To ensure compliance, ENL is programmed for all students through STARS. We use STARS Admin Section Properties to identify each course-section whether the course is ENL, which should be counted towards a student’s ENL minutes. We also use the monthly ELL Data Update Report each monitor and ensure compliance. a. ELA/ENL is delivered by either a dually certified teacher (ENL and a content area) or co-taught by a certified ENL teacher and a certified content area teacher (i.e., English language arts, math, science, or social studies). 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. We use the Integrated English as a new language (ENL) delivery model in which students receive core content area (i.e., English language arts, math, science, or social studies) and English language development instruction from a dually certified teacher or two certified teachers. For those scheduled in the Stand-alone English as a new language delivery model our ELLs receive 2018-19 CEP 52  instruction in order to acquire the English language needed for success in core content courses. Students programmed in the Integrated ENL delivery model receive core content area (i.e., English language arts, math, science, or social studies) and English language development instruction from a dually certified teacher or two certified teachers. To meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards in core content areas, our school-wide programming is designed to allow for our ENL teachers to attend content area team teaching meetings. In these meetings all teachers collaborate to create common core aligned performance task, lessons and rubrics. Teachers work together to design lessons that meet the needs of all students and use the guiding principles of the Universal Design for learning (UDL). UDL provides a blueprint for creating instructional goals, methods, materials, and assessments that work for everyone--not a single, one-size-fits-all solution but rather flexible approaches that can be customized and adjusted for individual needs. Teachers gather data about ELLs and use the National School Reform Faculty ATLAS- Learning from Student Work Protocol to analyze data trends . This protocol guides groups of teachers to discover what the ELLs understand and how they are thinking. Based on the results of the assessment, teachers determine the implications for planning and identify effective teaching strategies to intervene and assist the needs of each ELL student for the next unit of study. All teachers informally and formally assess students learning throughout the year and make adjustments when necessary to meet the needs of each student. Co-teachers meet regularly to co-plan for the Integrated ELA/ENL classes. Our ENL teachers works with ELLs in collaboration with general education classroom teachers to provide language acquisition and vocabulary support. There is a common preparation time between the 2 teachers. To meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards, our goal is to immerse ELL students in vocabulary acquisition. Teachers model academic language and consistently spiral language so that students’ language proficiency grows increasingly more complex. Direct vocabulary instruction is important, but it is insufficient and inefficient alone to foster students’ language and vocabulary development, therefore, we provide multiple opportunities for students to practice using language in discussions and writing. We ensure that students read often from a variety of text types, heighten students’ awareness of the language in the world around them, and develop the skills of students to learn new vocabulary on their own. Vocabulary acquisition in the stand-alone program is addressed through systematic and intensive vocabulary development and language-rich classrooms. A recent review of literature on reading instruction for ELLs found strong evidence to support the inclusion of high-quality vocabulary instruction in a curriculum for ELLs (Gersten et al., 2007). All content area classrooms develop and use vocabulary lists to help focus instruction on both content-specific vocabulary and common academic words that students may not know 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? Classroom teachers informally assess students learning in their native language by way of technological services, such as Google Apps for Education. The google classroom provides educators with the opportunity to use video demonstrations in various home languages and assess student leaning with Google technology. Furthermore, we use the Multilingual Literacy SIFE Screener (MLS) for the Identification of SIFE. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status Differentiation of instruction for our ELLs, as well as for the other students in our building, depends upon a child’s scholastic ability, his learning preference, and his level of achievement. The English Language Learner population at I.S. 14 is extremely diverse, not only in home language, but also in culture, educational experience, and learning strategy. Differentiation of instruction occurs in all of our classes on a regular basis. We adhere to the principles of Universal Design for Learning (UDL) to meet the needs of ELL subgroups. UDL is a set of principles for curriculum development that give all individuals equal opportunities to learn. a) We provide our students with interrupted formal education (SIFE) with rich and rigorous language experiences. We employ buddy-systems, services through Title III, and the benefits of our standalone ENL and integrated ENL instructional programs. Children meet with our guidance counselors and other support staff on a regular basis. Parental involvement is crucial. SIFE's are subjects of our ENL Inquiry Team and teachers use ongoing assessments in all content areas to assess 2018-19 CEP 53  progress of these students. ENL teachers meet with content area teachers on a regular basis to view the work of the children and explore new ways to meet the learning challenges facing the youngsters each day. This data is used to drive instruction in the classroom. Teachers of ELL attend professional development sessions regarding SIFEs regularly. ELLs, who are SIFEs, are grouped according to uniform school data such as state exam data from ELA and NYS Math examinations, the results of the NYSESLAT, and the ongoing classroom data acquired by their subject class and ESL teachers. The data is used to drive their instruction. Our ENL teachers communicate regularly with their colleagues who teach our SIFEs required material from subject content areas. All of our pedagogues work together to design differentiated lessons that adhere to the Common Core Learning Standards. Curriculum maps are provided for all teachers to support instruction. Teaching assistants assist the children when necessary and provide individualized instruction to reinforce what is learned in the regular subject area classroom. Students receive services during the school day, and they are given the opportunity to participate in our Title III after-school program for additional support and enrichment. The following are a few ways we differentiate instruction for SIFE's: use of technology for video and audio support, TPR – Total Physical Response, Google Translation (for translation & audio), Vocabulary/Pronunciation Bilingual Glossaries for content areas/subjects, Picture Dictionaries, Starfall/Listening/Speaking /Recording Voices, Multicultural/Bilingual Libraries, Listening Centers, Visual & Modeling, Graphic Organizers, MaxScholar online reading program, Wilson-Just Words. b) Newcomers, ELLs in U.S. schools for less than three years, are supported by being given English and translated introductions regarding school policies, established procedures, and daily routines for learning. We also provide these children with rich and rigorous language experiences. We employ buddy-systems, services through Title III, and the benefits of our standalone ENL and integrated ENL instructional programs. For students in the Entering level, we use Total Physical Response, labeling, songs and chants, drama, role playing, choral reading, shared reading, Brainstorming, language experience stories, buddy/partner reading, and sketch to-stretch activities. For the children in the Emerging and Transitioning levels, we align the tasks related to the literacy texts and assessments that require higher-order critical thinking skills. Students are moved from the Basic Interpersonal Communication Skills (BICS) to Cognitive Academic Language Proficiency (CALP) with scaffolding and the explicit teaching of the English language, including etymology, grammar with the study of literal and figurative language, and semantics. Students are encouraged to reflect upon their own experiences as a foundation for building vocabulary and understanding theme. Students receive content area instruction in English with certified subject teachers. Teachers differentiate their instruction to meet the needs of all students, including the ELLs. Classrooms are arranged for small group support and cooperative learning. Rooms are designed to provide visual support. Teachers use scaffolding, technology, tiered grouping, project based learning, and other differentiated strategies to help ELLs learn content and language proficiency. All ELL classrooms are equipped with computers that have full Internet access and programs designed for English Language Learners, such as Google Apps for Education. Also, to support our ELLs we use MaxScholar. MaxScholar is based on the Orton Gillingham method for improving reading skills, which has been proven successful for over 70 years through research and implementation in classrooms across the United States. This program offers a multisensory approach that accesses all avenues to the brain and creates new neural pathways in the brain, which establishes permanent retention of the knowledge. Features of this program: • allow students to focus either on individual letters, blends or digraphs. • Provide practice for handwriting, an essential part of reading. • use videos that demonstrate the correct pronunciation of letters, blends and digraphs. • drill and practice to help the students build important skills. • include fun games to reinforce what they have learned. c) The above practices are also in effect for our ELLs receiving service for four to six years, also known as Developing ELLs. ELLs, who receive service 4 to 6 years, are grouped according to uniform school data, baseline assessments, data from ELA and NYS Math Examinations, results of the NYSESLAT, and the classroom data acquired by their subject class and ESL teachers. All of our pedagogues work together to design differentiated tasks that meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. Instruction is scaffolded using the UDL principles for creating instructional goals, methods, materials, and assessments that work for everyone and flexible approaches that can be customized and adjusted for individual needs. Curriculum maps are provided for all teachers to support instruction. Paraprofessionals assist the children when 2018-19 CEP 54  necessary and provide individualized instruction to reinforce what is learned in the regular subject area classroom. Students are given the opportunity to participate in our after-school programs for additional support and enrichment. d) Long term ELLS with more than six years of service usually become case studies and require close inquiry to determine the lag in attaining proficiency in English. We sometimes refer these students for additional services through the PPC. Our long term ELLs receive targeted intervention, including conferencing, student contracts for increased academic work outside of school, and AIS during the school day e) Former ELLs are monitored and supported continuously. These are students who had been identified as English language learners and subsequently exited from ELL status. For at least two years following the school year in which a student is exited from ELL status, former ELLs receive at least one half of one unit of study of English as a new language (90 minutes per week) and are eligible for certain specified testing accommodations. Progress of these students is monitored like all students, on a regular basis. Content area teachers use UDL strategies to provide access to on level tasks and support diverse learners 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? The needs of ELLs-SWDs within the least restrictive environment are addressed based on individual needs. As mentioned, we employ the guidelines of UDL so that all students can access grade-level materials. UDL helps us address learner variability by suggesting flexible goals, methods, materials, and assessments that empower educators to meet these varied needs. We aim to have curricula that is created using UDL and therefore is designed from the outset to meet the needs of all learners. The UDL framework encourages creating flexible designs from the start that have customizable options, which allow all learners to progress from where they are and not where we would have imagined them to be. The options for accomplishing this are varied and robust enough to provide effective instruction to all learners. When planning we look toward the three primary principles, which are based on neuroscience research, guide UDL and provide the underlying framework for the Guidelines: Principle I: Provide Multiple Means of Representation (the “what” of learning). Principle II: Provide Multiple Means of Action and Expression (the “how” of learning), and Principle III: Provide Multiple Means of Engagement (the “why” of learning). 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? Here at I.S. 14 we have a wide range of diverse learners and our school curricula, instruction, and scheduling flexibility are designed so that English Language Learners and Students with disabilities are given access to the full continuum of services in the LRE appropriate. When planning for learning, we keep in mind the students’ individual student accommodations, modifications, and assistive technology found on their IEP to foster students’ success. Our school-wide structures and resources utilize staff and resources innovatively. We have always scheduled students so that they are in the least-restrictive environment for their individual needs. We provide flexible programming in order to provide a full continuum of services necessary. As stated, instructional planning is done collaboratively with the ENL teacher and content area teachers working in concert to meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards but teams are able to strategically identify barrier so to put structures in place to make instruction accessible, using guidelines provided by Universal Design for Learning. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. Our targeted intervention programs for the children are all offered in English. Staff members, who act as translators, will make phone calls home and assist teachers and support personnel who need to discuss specific intervention concerns with the parents of our ELLs. We offer academic intervention during the day programs in Language Arts and Math to support our ELL youngsters. In addition, Ms. Tiflinksy and Ms. Jeffries, The ENL teachers provide afterschool assistance to our ELL students. The after-school program is available for continued help and support in academics and socialization skills. Our afterschool program aligns and meets the demands of the ELA Common Core Curriculum. The teacher uses all techniques of ESL instruction such as modeling, hand-on activities, listening centers, read along books, and graphic organizers. The goal of the program is to increase ELL’s performance levels on state assessments. In addition, the afterschool program prepares students who will be taking the ELA for the first time with a strong focus on writing.Our Inquiry Team monitors the progress of our youngsters, and teachers meet regularly as teams to discuss how to use current data to drive instruction in their classrooms. Guidance counselors and other support personnel meet regularly with our youngsters to monitor their progress 2018-19 CEP 55  and help them deal with ongoing situations in their personal lives. Teachers give up their personal time to tutor children and advise them during regularly scheduled lunch periods. In addition, through the use of continuously looking at student work in all content areas, our teachers are able to identify the strengths and weaknesses of our ELL population on a regular basis. When teachers collaborate they can identify ELL barriers to learning and determine instructional interventions through the use of UDL principles. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? As our school continues to collaborate with MSQI, we will continue to use Just Words. Just Words is a highly explicit, multisensory decoding and spelling program for students who have mild to moderate gaps in their decoding and spelling proficiency but do not require intensive intervention. The Just Words curriculum provides a sophisticated study of word structure appropriate for students beyond the elementary grades. It provides direct and explicit teaching of “how English works” for both decoding and spelling automaticity. We will target ELLs with gaps in their decoding and spelling who are performing below grade level and who do not require intensive intervention but do require explicit decoding and spelling instruction due to word-level deficits. For this program to work, ELL teachers will work with small groups (up to 15 students). ENL teachers will choose from 2 implementation models. In the five classes per week model teachers will host 45 minutes classes, which will take about 30 weeks to complete all 14 units (2 week per unit, plus 2 weeks for review). In the Three classes per week model, teachers will work 45 minutes per class and it will take about 44 weeks to complete all 14 units (3 weeks per unit, plus 2 weeks for review). 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? N/A 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. All ELL students are afforded equal access to school programs. Students in freestanding ENL programs receive all instruction in English with native language support. Educational programs for ELLs embody the conceptual understanding of challenging content and well-developed learning strategies that will prepare ELLs to think critically, solve problems, and communicate in the language(s) of instruction. ELLs are actively engaged in standards-based academic curriculum. All students including ELLs are included in all school activities, after school programs, & Academic Intervention Services. All school programs are described in detail for the parents when letters are sent home from school. Children receive applications for the After-School Programs that include a set of permission slips for classroom videos and student evaluations at the end of the program. Applications are duplicated and translated for the parents. Translators explain the nature of each offering when necessary. This process is in effect for all after-school activities and supplemental services in our building. Because of our increasing immigrant population we have been awarded additional Title III funds. These funds are used for activities that provide enhanced instructional opportunities for immigrant students. We use the funds to enhance our afterschool program for newcomers by extending the time of our program. We also added more chrome books to the program, which provides more students access to technology. Further, we opened up a morning program to target a subgroup of immigrant students who will benefit from targeted instruction from an ENL teacher with home-language support form a teaching assistant. Our Spanish speaking ELLs, who are deemed proficient in their native language according to the results of Spanish language assessments, are given additional support. We encourage them to take the NYS Spanish Proficiency Exam for High School credit. ELLs who excel in math and science content are encouraged to attend our classes in NYS Regents classes and take the exam in June. Students who are eligible for NYS testing in ELA or math, or who scored below the grade of mid-Level 2 also receive academic intervention (AIS) during our strategic reading period. All ELL classrooms are equipped with computers that have full Internet access and programs designed for English Language Learners. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. Prentice Hall Literature Common Core Edition is a comprehensive literacy program that brings together the cornerstones of the Common Core State Standards and provides teachers and students with a full array of instructional resources. An ELL support version of the book is available to differentiate instruction. ELLs are fully integrated in other content areas and supported with material designed to break barriers to learning. Textbooks from the Harcourt Newcomer series are also used to focus on academic language and organization within the content areas. Standards based materials are used with teacher 2018-19 CEP 56  scaffolding activities as needed. We provide native language support through the growth of an extensive native language literature collection. Bilingual glossaries provide our students with opportunities to share elements of their native languages with their classmates who learn new words and also discuss common phrases. We are in the second year of expanding our Google Apps for Education program. Shell Bank’s Google Apps for Education program (GAFE) is available in 50% of classroom and 75% of ELL classrooms. GAFE classrooms are equipped with Chrome books. Our ENL teachers are trained in GAFE and have full carts of laptops. Our participating teachers are highly and continuously trained in GAFE. GAFE provides ELLs and families with 24/7 access to learning by removing the brick and mortar model of learning. With this model, students including ELLs have access to school resources, lessons, assignments, and homework from their school, home devices and /or mobile. GAFE allows ELLs to be active participants in a lesson and do so in their own time and at their own pace. While working, teachers are able to comment on their work providing very specific feedback. ELLs are able to translate their work using GAPE making learning more accessible. For the children in the Intermediate/Advanced levels, we align the tasks related to the literacy texts and assessments that require higher-order critical thinking skills. Students are moved from the Basic Interpersonal Communication Skills (BICS) to Cognitive Academic Language Proficiency (CALP) with scaffolding and the explicit teaching of the English language, including etymology, grammar with the study of literal and figurative language, and semantics. Students are encouraged to reflect upon their own experiences as a foundation for building vocabulary and understanding theme. For students who are identified and need intervention, they will participate in the Just Words cohort. Just Words is a highly explicit, multi-sensory decoding and spelling program for students who have mild to moderate gaps in their decoding and spelling proficiency but do not require intensive intervention. The Just Words curriculum provides a sophisticated study of word structure appropriate for students beyond the elementary grades. It provides direct and explicit teaching of “how English works” for both decoding and spelling automatically. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? We provide native language support by the use of bilingual dictionaries, native language classroom libraries, technology enrichments in the native language, and the buddy system. We will continue to explore how the use of Google Apps for Education can be used by teachers to embed more home language support for ELLs, such as videos in students’ native language and use of translation services. Teachers of Ells will receive ongoing professional learning opportunities on how to properly plan for home language support and incorporate strategies into their planning and practice. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. The ELL population at I.S.14 is served by grade. ENL is delivered through a stand-alone model or integrated ENL, which allows ENL teachers to work closely with content area teachers. Through STARS, our school ensures that the CR Part 154 Requirements for English as a New Language are followed and we schedule our students according to the breakdown of the total number of minutes for which they are entitled. Our teachers infuses ENL strategies into grade level content instruction so that students can learn content and receive content credit while simultaneously developing English skills. Also, we assist students with Interrupted Formal Education (SIFE) accelerate academic and language development by providing additional instructional time before school (AIS) and after school. The Title III (supplemental Service) for ELL students is available during our afterschool program. This program is taught using research based strategies, with a focus on speaking, reading, writing, and mathematics. Students also learn through enrichment activities, including Computer-Based Language and Total Physical Response activities. Instruction is in English and test preparation is provided. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? At I.S. 14, we h are co-located with an Inclusion program from 811k. All students in the inclusion program have flexible schedule and are taught by I.S. 14 staff. Ells in this program are served by our ENL staff. Ells in the Inclusion program have access to the same instructional material as I.S. 14 Ells. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). Each May, we conduct orientation sessions for parents of incoming ELL sixth graders where we explain our programs, and we talk about extra-curricular activities for our youngsters. We offer translations in major languages so that the parents can 2018-19 CEP 57  understand the nature of our meeting. ELLs and their parents have the opportunity to view the school building and classrooms, talk with subject teachers, and ask questions. The prospective sixth grade ELLs can also tour the building and view the work of the other children in the school. Prior to the opening of school in September, newly enrolled students meet the ENL teachers, Ms. Tiflinsky and Ms. Jeffries, content teachers and some of the youngsters from our current ENL Programs who may be able to converse with them in their native languages. Parents fill out necessary forms to clarify the prior education of their children. This aids us when we place the students for instruction. The Parent Coordinator/Language Access Coordinator and our bilingual staff are also available to facilitate an easy start to the new school year. In September, when we meet our newly enrolled ELLs, our ENL teachers duplicate the established procedures that we have set in practice for our incoming sixth graders. All new students are assigned a buddy, they are given a tour of our school building, and they are greeted by our general staff and made to feel welcome. Parents are encouraged to maintain contact with teachers and support staff throughout the course of the school year. ELLs who enroll throughout the year are welcomed in a similar manner. All ELLs and their parents have the opportunity to view the school building and classrooms, talk with subject teachers, and ask questions in their native language. Students are assessed and placed in the appropriate schedule in accordance to CR Part 154. Teachers are quickly provided the most up to date data and integrate ENL strategies based on the needs of the students. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? N/A 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? N/A Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? All ENL teachers and staff at the school are required to participate in Professional Development sessions. ENL teachers will continue to participate in regular Professional Learning experiences provided by the Brooklyn South Field Support Center. In addition, once a month our ENL Ambassador will attend monthly afternoon professional learning session with the District 22 Ambassador cohort. ENL teachers also attend compliance and testing professional support sessions as given throughout the year. We encourage all teachers to attend all professional learning experiences available through “Opportunities for Educators of ELLs” given by the NYC Education Division of English Language Learners & Student Support. Teachers are also continuously encouraged to extend their licenses and enter a TESOL graduate program. Those attending these programs will turn-key best practices and instructional resources that enhance teaching practices and make learning more accessible to our Ells. Due to our increasing ELL population more time will be dedicated to providing teachers support in planning Common Core aligned lessons that meet the needs of our diverse group of ELLs. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. At the end of the school year teachers reflect on the success and challenges to educating English Language Learners. Using 2018-19 CEP 58  teacher feedback, administration along with the UFT Professional Development committee collaborate to develop a PD plan for the school year to effectively utilize Monday PL time. During this meeting, we map out the professional learning sessions to enhance teacher planning and practice for our ELL population. All records and agendas are held in the school’s Professional Development binder in a central location. Professional learning for all staff includes but is not limited to the following topics: The Language Allocation Policy plan is an essential document for our school, and it describes our plans for the success of our English Language Learners. Who are our SIFE students, and what can we do to ensure their success in our building? What measures do we have in place to assure that our curriculum in all content areas give all individuals’ equal opportunities to learn? What does effective home language support look like in a classroom? How can we analyze ELL data effectively to drive instruction? Based on our population, what do we need to know about our students cultures? (Cultural Competence) How can we distinguish Language Acquisition from Learning Disabilities How can we supporting Ells’ Achievement though Disciplinary Literacy and Academic Language for ELLs? Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? . The ENL team utilizes the school’s parent afternoon time to hold individual parent meetings for our ELLs. The school sets aside parent meeting time once a week. During this time, parents of ELLs are scheduled so there is adequate time to review data and go over individual parent concerns and questions. During these meetings parent are provided data that shows their child’s progress toward English Language proficiency. Content area teachers also attend this meeting to provide parents with information on how their child is progressing. In-school staff members are available at this time to assist with interpretations. If needed, we utilize the DOE’s Translation and Interpretation Unit if a school staff member is not available. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. In addition to PA meetings, parents are invited to attend several school functions. Our Parents’ Association meets each month to address the needs of our children and the needs of our school. All parents, including the parents of our Ells, are invited to attend these meetings. Saturday parent meetings are often aligned to the PA meetings and appropriate staff are available to assist with translations. Invitations to parent meetings are translated into the native languages of the children, and they are sent home with the original English letters. In addition to parent-teacher conferences and annual individual meetings, our parents are invited to our school at the discretion of both the teachers and the parents to visit their child’s classroom and observe his/her performance in class. We encourage our parents to be a part of our school environment and work with us as a team to support the academic and social success of their children. Parents are invited to attend our annual ENL award ceremony to celebrate the accomplishments of their children. Parents are invited to accompany their children on classroom excursions, take part in our festivals and school events, and support us throughout the school year. Those ELLs who are enrolled in the millennium after school program participate in family trips on Saturdays around NYC. We have an “Open Door Policy” for all of our parents, including the parents of our Ells. Through Title III, we offer programs to support our parents after school and in the evenings. Our ENL teachers, Ms. Tiflinsky and Ms. Jeffries conduct workshops to address topics requested by parental survey. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Paste response here: 2018-19 CEP 59  2018-19 CEP 60 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Teri Ahearn, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 CEP 61  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: School DBN: Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Teri Ahearn Title Principal Theresa Morgan-Turchiano Assistant Principal Tina Maffeo Ella Tiflinsky Sara Giglio Parent Coordinator ENL/Bilingual Teacher Parent Marilyn Jeffries / ESL Teacher/Subject Area Karen Marcus/ELA Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach Kassandra Lee-Loomis School Counselor Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 2018-19 CEP 62  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 22k014 School Name: Shell Bank Superintendent: Julia Bove The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Tina Maffeo Parent Coordinator YES YES * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. We collect data from the Part III Parent Information section of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS). The parent’s preferred written and oral language is entered into ATS upon admittance. This information is supported by yearly collection of Emergency Contact Cards. Each school year parents and guardians fill out blue emergency contact cards which ask the preferred written and oral language of communication of parents. We use the ATS report – RAPL to provide our staff with each parents’ preferred language of communication. This data assists the school in determining the number of translated copies of parents documents needed in respective languages. On the HLIS, ELL parents check the language to which they would prefer to communicate. When parents are invited to school for orientations and meetings with the teachers of their children, we assess their ability to communicate in English. If we determine that the parent needs support in his/her primary language, we depend upon the assistance of our staff members who are able to converse with the parent in his/her primary language. If 2018-19 CEP 63  we do not have a staff member available to communicate with the parent, we contact the Translation Unit for support and assistance. We translate school letters using the Translation and interpretation Unit, and we distribute the English and the translated versions of the documents to the children. We encourage all of our students to bring home all notices in a timely fashion. The Parent Coordinator assists with the distribution of translated parent letters and emails parents as well. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral ENGLISH ARABIC RUSSIAN SPANISH CHINESE ANY URDU HAITIAN CREOLE GEORGIAN UZBEK CROATIAN BENGALI (BANGLA IN BANGLADESH) TADZHIK (AKA TAJIK) TWI FRENCH EWE PORTUGUESE VIETNAMESE YORUBA AMOY (A.K.A.FUKIENESE) CANTONESE MANDARIN TURKISH 547 62 56 43 33 31 26 5 4 2 2 2 2 1 1 1 1 1 0 0 0 0 66.71 7.56 6.83 5.24 4.02 3.78 3.17 0.61 0.49 .24 .24 .24 .24 .12 .12 .12 .12 .12 0 0 0 0 539 67 56 43 19 34 25 5 4 2 2 2 2 1 1 1 1 1 2 6 6 1 65.73 8.17 6.83 5.24 2.32 4.15 3.05 61 .0.49 .24 .24 .24 24 .12 .12 .12 .12 .12 .24 .73 .73 .12 2018-19 CEP 64  3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. n/a Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to Families How do you plan to translate? Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. Parent Brochure, Parent Survey & Program Selection Form, Entitlement Letter, Parent’s bill of rights, Continued Entitlement Letter, Non Entitlement Letter, Non Entitlement/Transition Letter, Title III Letter. September DOE Translated documents Trip Slips on-going Consent to Photograph September School Wide Policy for Electronic Devices and Cell Phones September Benchmark Testing Results October and January Immunization Notices September School events, Parent meetings, monthly newsletter & calendar. Monthly Interpretation unit- LAC will submit documents to the Interpretation Unit in a timely fashion so to provide families with up to date school information. Interpretation unit- LAC will submit documents to the Interpretation Unit in a timely fashion so to provide families with up to date school information. Interpretation unit- LAC will submit documents to the Interpretation Unit in a timely fashion so to provide families with up to date school information. Interpretation unit- LAC will submit documents to the Interpretation Unit in a timely fashion so to provide families with up to date school information. Interpretation unit- LAC will submit documents to the Interpretation Unit in a timely fashion so to provide families with up to date school information. Interpretation unit- LAC will submit documents to the Interpretation 2018-19 CEP 65  State testing dates and information November and March DOE Translated documents Unit in a timely fashion so to provide families with up to date school information. Graduation and High School application information September and October DOE Translated documents Interpretation unit- LAC will submit documents to the Interpretation Unit in a timely fashion so to provide families with up to date school information. Interpretation unit- LAC will submit documents to the Interpretation Unit in a timely fashion so to provide families with up to date school information 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide Annual individual meetings. We individually meet with the parents or guardians of English language learners at least once a year monthly meetings starting in September by appointment parent-teacher conferences 9/26, 11/30, 3/6 Saturday Curriculum Sessions November& January High School Application Afternoon October interpretation service(s)? These meetings are conducted with a qualified interpreter/translator in the language or mode of communication the parent or guardian best understands. These meetings are conducted with a qualified interpreter/translator in the language or mode of communication the parent or guardian best understands. These meetings are conducted with a qualified interpreter/translator in the language or mode of communication the parent or guardian best understands. These meetings are conducted with a qualified interpreter/translator in the language or mode of communication the parent or guardian best understands. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. 2018-19 CEP 66  With a school emergency pertaning to an individual student, a call is conducted with a qualified interpreter/translator in the language or mode of communication the parent or guardian best understands. In the case of a school emergency, parents are notified via email of the emergency and the school's safety plan. Translations of the plan are attached to the email. Follow up calls are made to parents in their preferred language. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. In September, during Chancellor's Conference Day, staff will be versed on procedures for ensuring that Limited English Speaking parents are provided with a meaningful opportunity to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) We provide each parent whose primary language is a covered language and who require language assistance services with a copy of the Bill of Parent Rights and Responsibilities which includes their rights regarding translation and interpretation services. We find translated versions of this document, in the covered languages, at http://schools.nyc.gov/RulesPolicies/ParentBillofRights/default.htm. We post a sign at the primary entrance in each of the covered languages indicating the availability of interpretation services. The language identification guide is available for parents at the school safety desk and in the main office. Translated emails and letters will be sent home to families concerning parent engagement events such as PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc.. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? The LAC will gather feedback from parents about the language services they receive via translated online survey. Using feedback, we have increased staff training to include the best practices or increasing our families' language access to school information. 2018-19 CEP 67 
