2018-19 COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (CEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 16K021 School Name: P.S. 021 CRISPUS ATTUCKS Principal: LESLIE FRAZIER 2018-19 CEP 1  Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 CEP 2  School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information Crispus Attucks Elementary 16k021 331600010021 3-kthrough 5 School Number (DBN): 180 Chauncey street, Brooklyn NY 11233 718 493-9681 Phone Number: 718 953-3980 Fax: Leslie Frazier lfrazie@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Email Address: Leslie Frazier Regina Bufford Trina Meyers/Kanicka Ingram MagaliFlowers Celeste Boston n/a n/a District Information Geographical District: 16 Rahesha Amon Superintendent: 1010 Lafayette Street, Brooklyn NY 11221 Superintendent’s Office Address: ramon@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718 574-2834 Phone Number: Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) Brooklyn North Bernadette Fitzgerald FSC: Executive Director: 2018-19 CEP 3  Executive Director’s Office Address: 131 Livingston Street, Brooklyn, NY Bfitzge2@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: (718) 935-3352 Phone Number: Fax: 2018-19 CEP 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Leslie Frazier Regina Bufford Trina Meyers Celeste Boston Alexis Vivar Aisha Charles Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/PTA Member/PTA Member/PTA 2018-19 CEP 5  Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Carla Arnold Magali Flowers ShaquannaShaw Juanita Johnson Rosalinda Warren ChantrelJames Member/CSA Member/UFT Member/PTA Member/UFT Member/UFT Member/UFT Member/ Member/ Member/ 2018-19 CEP 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with 2018-19 CEP 7  the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement 2018-19 CEP 8  Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? The Crispus Attucks School in partnership with its children, families and community guarantees each child a high quality education that provides for the intellectual, physical, and social-emotional well-being in a safe and orderly environment that will promote life-long learning and responsible citizenship. 2018-19 CEP 9  2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. The Crispus Attucks Elementary School serves families from five neighborhood housing developments as well as other multi-family residences in Bedford Stuyvesant/Stuyvesant Heights, Brooklyn. The school serves approximately 569 students (Male 49.3 and Female 50.7) ( Other 1%: Black: 86%, Hispanic: 10%, White:3%) in grades 3-k -5 along with a District 75 Inclusion program integrated in Grades 1-5, which consists of approximately 15 students. The teachers are distributed as follows: 27 classrooms, 5 clusters, 2 Peer Collaborative Teachers, 1 Math support staff, 1 full-time Occupational Therapist, 1 part-time Physical Therapist, 1. full-time Speech, 13 paraprofessionals (K-5), two 3-K and three Pre-K paraprofessionals, 2 school aides, 1 School Based Support Team (SBST) Family Worker, 1 School Psychologist, 1 (SBST) Social Worker and 1 Bridging the Gap (STH) Social Worker, 1 guidance counselor, 1 parent coordinator, 1 secretary, 2 administrators, 1 Community Based organization (BCS) and Rise up and Walk (3-k and Pre-k) after-school programs. Our educational program invokes the standard of " Excellence without Excuses" A mission to create leaders as agents of change. All classes are grouped heterogeneously. All core subjects are taught by the classroom teacher, except grade 5 which uses the departmentalized model for writing. social studies/social justice, math- Algebra For All Cohort 2, and science. Students in Grades K-5 receive science, physical education and health, library science, and visual/performing arts weekly. These subjects are taught by special cluster teachers. Classrooms are student-centered, print rich and organized for differentiated instruction to meet the demands of the Common Core Standards. To provide a more comprehensive program to address multiple learning styles, we engage in the following partnership/organizations: Behind the Book, Introduction to Mandarin and Chinese Culture, Asase Yaa Cultural Arts Foundation, Science Environmental Center, STEM Initiative, Hydroponics STEM Lab, Bailey’s Café Mentoring Program, Bridge Street Mentoring for Young Men of Character, Chionesu Bakari for young men, Brooklyn Community Services (Compass/Sonic Program), National Chorale, Leader In Me, Allergic to Salads, Spoons Across America, Studio in Schools, Young Audiences, Pearls of Maat, Noel Pointer Violin Program, Double Dutch, Cheerleading/Steppers, Elementary School League Basketball and New York Road Runners Panther's Track and Field program. To further narrow the achievement gap and demonstrate academic growth across curricular areas, the following Instructional focus have been developed school-wide: Increase reading stamina across all grade levels   Construct viable arguments by engaging in meaningful discourse to support reasoning and evidence in writing  across all content areas through teacher modeling, direct instruction, and use of exemplars Strengthen academic rigor daily where students raise questions, solve problems, revise work to meet common core standards, think and reason to complete challenging tasks To foster self- esteem, personal leadership and student voice, the "Leader In Me" program is being implemented school wide. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. Additionally, students in the lowest third are strategically targeted through small group instruction by using multiple entry points strategies to engage students. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. 2018-19 CEP 10  By using the Framework for Great Schools, we utilize Tuesdays’ Family Engagement opportunities to leverage greater conversations with parents or guardians, to garner additional support and strengthening partnerships. These sessions provide parents with academic and social-emotional strategies that could be implemented at home. Further communication tools such as : Class Dojo, School Messenger and Constant Contact are used to provide information and regular feedback to parents regarding students' progress. Overall, the Crispus Attucks Elementary School works to: 1. Increase communication between the School Leadership Team and the parent body at large. 2. Showcase rigorous instruction through monthly parent classroom visits, bulletin board displays, and student-led conferences. 3. Strengthen professional learning communities and inquiry team process using the Data Team Experience ,Teachers College Writing Project, Jump Math and Algebra For All in mathematics, and the professional learning focus groups as facilitated by Brooklyn North Field Support Center. 4. Foster a supportive environment by implementing Positive Behavior Intervention System (PBIS), work with Family-life and Mental Health consultant will promote a holistic approach to students' social-emotional growth. 2018-19 CEP 11  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 16K021 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration PK,0K,01,02,03,04,05 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 573 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 26 26 6 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 27 20 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 74.0% % Attendance Rate 72.6% % Reduced Lunch 2.4% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.0% 11.0% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 3.1% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 5.74 0% 0% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 57.4% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 74% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A N/A N/A NO NO Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A NO NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A YES High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 69 69 91.2% 0.9% 18.5% 85.0% 0.9% 0.0% 2 10% 6.4 58.3% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No NO N/A N/A N/A NO NO N/A N/A N/A NO YES N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 CEP 12  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. The 2018 NYC School Survey preliminary data indicated that both parents and teachers viewed the school as having rigorous instruction yielding in high quality work products. Crispus Attucks/PS 21 teacher teams meet regularly to plan curricular units and examine students' response to writing prompts. The Measure of Teacher Practice (MOTP) reports reflect the need for increased concentration in components, 3b. Questioning and Discussion Techniques and 3d. Using Assessment in Instruction. While 92% of parents agree that the school provides rigorous instruction and the teachers' MOTP reports reflect mostly effective ratings students who are exceeding standards need to be further engaged moving forward. New York State data reflected a 25% increase (58% levels 3 and 4) on Common Core ELA exam, indicating greater strength in interpreting the central message in a literary text, referring to the author's point of view, and more emphasis on writing responses that show how reasons and evidence support the author's point of view from various texts as noted in the Item skills analysis. Similarly, a 26% increase (59% levels 3 and 4) in mathematics across grades 3-5. The Items Skills analysis shows greatest improvement in number sense, yet greater attention to division, comparing fractions with unlike denominators, and using formulas. The New York City Performance Tasks in Grades K-2 similarly reflect priority in Writing Trait 4 - Writing responses to Informational text, number sense and fluency, and solving word problems using more that one operation. We also considered qualitative data sources, such as 2018 Item Skills Analysis, NYC Quality Review and a school created teacher survey which is summarized below: Data Source-New York State 2018 ELA and Math Exam o Finding: Our students moved from a 32% to 57.8% in ELA and 33% to 58.6 % in Math. Greater improvement needed in RL. 3.2, RI. 4.7,RL.4.5, RL.5.3, 5.6, RI. 5.8 W.3.2, W.4.2, W.5.2 Math- Grade 3OA.5 :Applied multiplication and division properties Grade 4NBT.5- Interpret multiplication equation and solve multiplication and division word problems Grade 5NF.- Adding an subtracting fractions with unlike denominators and mixed numbers 2018-19 CEP 13  Data Source-NYC Quality Review o Findings: The Quality Indicator 1.1, ensure engaging, rigorous, and coherent curricula in all subjects, accessible for a variety of learners and aligned to Common Core Learning Standards and/or content standards. " Quality Indicator 4.2 -greater need for coherence across teacher teams to narrow inquiry work and suggested strategies. Data Source-Teacher Survey o Findings: According to a qualitative in house teacher survey conducted in the spring of 2018, teachers expressed a need for greater communication and vertical collaboration when analyzing student work samples. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, students constructed responses on the New York State ELA and Math exam will reflect an increase of 5% by engaging students to produce higher level writing products across content areas. 2018-19 CEP 14 Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Students K-5 October- May, 2019 Universal Literacy Coach (K-2), Teachers in Grades 3-5, Librarian, Science Cluster, SETSS provider Tech provider, teachers, paraprofessionals, Jump Math team consultant, Algebra For All Team leads Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Grade Teams (k-5) will collaborate to plan writing plan lessons using TC grade facilitators, Literature and Informational texts found in the Journeys (Gr. 3), Reading Street and Ready Gen programs (Gr. 4-5). Scaffolding of Depth of Knowledge questions will be used to deepen critical thinking and writing responses. Students (1-5) will use iReady Math at least 3x weekly to address fluency and problem solving. To address mathematical fluency and number sense, teachers incorporate Jump Math program into the 75 minute block 4 times weekly. Teachers in grade 5 use the departmentalize model to strengthen mathematical thinking through the Algebra For All project Teachers analyze observation checklists, grow and glow feedback and exit slips during common planning sessions Teachers analyze iReady bi-weekly data reports Grade Teams (k-2) work with ULIC to plan foundational skill lessons and reading strategy lessons using Journeys Program and classroom libraries. Parent workshops will be given 3-4 times per year to share math and writing strategies that can be used for reinforcement. Grade 4 and 5 Grade 5 Students 1-5 Students K-2 Parents K-5 October- May, 2019 All teachers October- May, 2019 Teachers in Grades October 2018 January 2019 K-2 Classroom Teachers AIS providers Administrators 2018-19 CEP 15  3b – Parent and Family Engagement May 2018 Special Ed liaison How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Monthly curricular grade goals are posted in school and on website. Parent workshops in math and ELA are conducted bi-monthly to address standards and work products. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. The instructional resources used to leverage this goal: Scholastic Magazines K-5, Houghton Mifflin Journey's Text in Grades K-3, Ready Gen, Reading Street and novels Grades 4-5. Universal Literacy Coach and classroom libraries, iReady technology tool, NYC Performance Series,Amplify assessment K-2, Teacher's College Writing Project, Go Math, Jump Math Resources, and weekly common- planning time Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG X PTA Funded In Kind X Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. According to the expectations aligned to the Framework element of Rigorous Instruction Crispus Attucks/PS 21 will by February of 2019, have students engage in NYC Performance Tasks in reading and math, Ready NY, iReady math across grade levels 1-5 to assess individual growth areas. February, 2019 additional tasks in ELA were administered to address the development of constructed responses to include inferences related to the central theme. The RACCE Strategy was updated to include an additional component C to address these needs. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) Teachers will have engaged in the following to assess student learning through: Published Writing Teacher Feedback (Glow and Grow) Rubrics Conferences 2018-19 CEP 16  Data reports Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 17  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? Data: School Instructional Team will analyze 2017-2018 School Survey Results. Findings: Survey data reflects that 81% of parents agree that the school creates a culture that encourages student support and social emotional growth (92% of Teachers reported positive responses and 89% of teachers reported positive responses). Data: Student survey conducted in June 2018. Findings: 90% students in grades 2-5 felt supported by the administration and teachers. However, through Student Government meetings students expressed a need for discussions affecting social-emotional behavior and lack of conflict resolution strategies. Data: NYC School Survey and OORS Safety portal Findings: reflects a safe school environment and minimal to no incidents of bullying. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, at least 95% of all classes will be implementing Positive Behavior Intervention System through the study of the text and discussion, "7 Habits of Happy Kids"), engagement in restorative circles (grade 2-5) and classroom discussions of proactive decision making. 2018-19 CEP 18  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Our school School Culture team comprised of the guidance counselor, School Support Liaison, Librarian, mental health coordinator, selected crisis-management paraprofessionals, one administrator, one parent representative, 1 school aide, and school nurse review Chancellor's Regulation. A832 and Respect For All plan to ensure implementation of guidelines. Students, parents, and teachers October 2018- June 2019 School Culture Team comprised of Guidance Counselor, School Support Liaison, 1 Crisis Paraprofessional, 2 Teacher Representatives The School Support Liaison and guidance counselor refer students who make claims of conflict with other students . A series of conflict resolution opportunities are scheduled to meet the needs of students and address positive intervention strategies. 12 students across K-5 October 2018- June 2019 School Culture Team,classroom teachers, SPED providers Begin Circle discussions among students with conflict to provide opportunity for student voice. Use Arts grant to support ELLs and Family Engagement Classroom teachers emphasize 1 of the 7 habits discussed every two months in the book and students create works of art, reflective essays or conduct book talks to interpret their understanding of the habit. Student Ambassadors and Student Government representatives lead in service activities to assist in supporting a safe school environment. K-1 (4) 2-3 (4) 4-5 (4) Student K-5 28 Student Repre- sentatives School Culture Team October 2018- June 2019 weekly October 2018- June 2019 School Culture Team, Classroom and Cluster teachers October 2018- June 2019 Dean, Guidance Counselor, Parent Coordinator 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. The School Based Support Team comprised of School Based Liaison, Guidance counselor, Administrator, School Psychologist, and IEP Teacher meet monthly to adjust goals for Social -Emotional Intervention for students and plans for parent outreach. 2018-19 CEP 19  Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Male mentoring facilitators, girls mentoring groups, partnering clinical psychologist and mental health liaison will be used to reinforce PBIS strategies to strengthen school climate. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, short term monitoring using 6 week cycles,Teacher anecdotal records and weekly incident reports shared with School Support Team will be used to determine strategies for necessary intervention (school and home), and the number of follow up sessions needed to determine the effectiveness of the intervention. February 2019 reports show that student behavior has been minimal as students are learning to self-regulate and/or mediate issues with the school support liaison. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Teacher anecdotal records Parent behavioral Forms Informal Observations Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 20  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Data: School Quality Review 2017-8 Findings: Curriculum and Effective Teacher Pedagogy; more collaboration needed Data: School Quality Review 2017-18 Findings: Teacher Teams: Engage in structured professional collaboration on teams using an inquiry approach that promotes shared leadership and focuses on improved student learning Data: NYC School Survey Findings: 90% Positive Responses Data: Teacher Team Minutes, Agendas, planning re-teach models Findings: Team minutes reflect 70% teacher collaboration and inquiry work Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By 2019, at least 95% of grade level teacher teams will be engaged in 4-6 week cycles of teacher instructional rounds to strengthen teacher pedagogy and address instructional gaps. 2018-19 CEP 21  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Devise a schedule to support instructional rounds on each grade level at least 2x per semester. Text study group using, " The Power of Teacher Rounds", by Vivian Troan 38 Sept. 2018 Peer Collaborative Teachers teachers Feb. Engage in professional learning with ULIC, teacher leaders, FSC curriculum supports, and Data Corp liaisons 2019 Teachers Gr (K-5) October 2018- June 2019 Teachers Teams in 4-6 week cycles of inquiry to analyze student work in the following: writing, fluency, and mathematical problem solving Students approaching standards (2.0-2.9) October 2018- June 2019 Administrators Grade Teams, Peer Collaborative Teachers Administrators, FSC Facilitator Grade Teams, Administrators, teacher leaders 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Family Engagement Time is provided every Tuesday. Parent workshops are held 1x per month in literacy or math. Each parent is scheduled to engage in conversation with teachers at least two times per year exclusive of Parent Teacher Conferences. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Brooklyn North Professional Learning Series, Think Central, Amplify Education UFT Contractual Trainee dates, Jump Math facilitators, Peer Collaborative teachers, and common planning periods. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. 2018-19 CEP 22  X X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By June 2019 all grade teams will conduct cycles of inquiry every 4-6 weeks and assess progress by conducting check points in November 2018, Mid December 2018, January 2019. Beginning March 2019, Mid April 2019, Beginning June 2019 student work products will be shared in grade teams. Grade Team minutes will be collected and reviewed by the Instructional team to examine impact on student learning. February 2019 cycles of inquiry in mathematics are addressing gaps in student's conceptual understanding and strategies for the re-teach component of the lesson. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Journeys benchmarks NY Ready ELA iReady online math Teacher created assessments Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 23  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Data: NYC School Survey 2018 Findings: 91% Positive Responses in Effective School Leadership Data: School Quality Review 2017-18 Findings: Proficient Pedagogy, Assessment, School Culture Data: School Leadership Team Survey Findings: Positive Responses Collective Decision making process Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, at least 90% of teachers will work in teacher teams to address areas of Measures of Teacher Practice ratings below 3.00 (3d) and use quick checks to assess critical thinking before, during and after lessons. 2018-19 CEP 24  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? The Instructional Team meets monthly to analyze school-wide data, select additional instructional resources to strengthen content, and provide schedule for turnkey opportunities Teachers September 2018-June 2019 Data Team Facilitators meet bi-weekly with grade leaders to confirm team progress. Analyze quick checks samples. Teachers Monthly School Leadership Team review of cycles of inquiry. SLT School Implementation Team assesses student progress toward meeting IEP goals. Sped. Students September 2018-June 2019 September 2018-June 2019 October 2018- June 2019 7 Teacher Representatives and 2 Administrators Data Team Facilitators (2 teachers), FSC Academic Policy Coordinator 2 Administrators, 4 Teachers (UFT), 6 Parents, 1 GE Teacher, 2 Sped Teachers, 1 SETSS, 1 SBST Social Worker, 1 Guidance Counselor, 1 AIS Teacher, 1 Psychologist 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Mental Health DOE consultant, ParentCorp, Studio in Schools, and AMCE community partnership provides quarterly cycles of workshops for parents and students on Academic Intervention, Mental Health (self-esteem, stress reducers, bullying) , Bridging the Communication Gap Mental Health Community Liaison provides family outreach and connections to outside agencies. Parent Coordinators provide direct information to families monthly along with open access policy. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment 2018-19 CEP 25  Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Scheduling adjustments are made weekly to maximize the time needed for all participants. Supervisor per session needed to facilitate professional learning activities. Per Diem needed to acquire substitute to provide class coverage on selected professional development days. Instructional material and venue for the Annual School Retreat will be scheduled in galaxy upon the team's decision. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA Title II, Part A SIG X PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Sample questions from the 2017- 2018 Surveys/ Questionnaire will be used every 3 months to leverage ratings from the previous years responses. This will determine the next steps for improvement. Analyze 3 student work samples from each class November 2018, January 2019, March 2019, May 2018 to determine accuracy of student responses using rubrics and exemplars. February 2019 additional professional learning is devoted to using "Back Pocket" questions to leverage 3b. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. NYC Teacher Survey questions Teacher created questions Writing Rubrics Math exemplars Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 26  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. School Survey Report exceeds the Citywide Average for Strong Family-Community Ties. This report reflects that at least 89-92% of parents agree that the school staff regularly communicates, provides feedback, welcomes classroom visits to observe instruction. 2017-2018 Attendance data reflects 91% which is a 4% difference in NYC's attendance data. Less than 50% parents/guardians attend PTA monthly meetings, but greater than 70% attend school performances. 5% of chronically absent students reflecting 20 or more absences demonstrated low performance. Although parents are informed, communication is provided and instruction is considered rigorous according to the 2018 Survey Report, parents indicate via PTA meetings a need for increased understanding of work that exceeds. Parents are invited to attend a bi-monthly academic workshop on last Thursday of that month to observe the teacher's practice and strategies in English Language Arts or Math. The following Extra-Curricular activities to support home -school partnerships to enrich the civic life of the school: Bureau of Brooklyn Community Services -DYCD program NYU Langhorne Center- ParentCorps Program Local Church affiliation - Bridge Street Mentors Baileys Cafe Rites of Passage for Girls Hydroponics STEM Learning Boy Scouts of America Noel Pointer Foundation Chionesu Bakari- Boys Mentoring School Wellness Program Student Ambassadors Student Government 2018-19 CEP 27  Swim for Life Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, parent involvement will improve by at least 5% at various parent events (monthly workshops, PTA meetings, principal round table) as indicated by attendance and parent feedback surveys from the 2017-2018 school year. 2018-19 CEP 28  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? A targeted assistance approach is used by the Attendance Coordinator and School Support liaison to support parents of chronically absent and/or late students Parents and students October - June 2019 "ParentCorps", New York University Langhorne Medical Center will provide monthly parent workshops during the fall and spring Pre-K and K Parents October - June 2019 Attendance Coordinator, Dean, Parent Coordinator and Guidance Counselor Guidance Counselor, Parent Coordinator and teachers All Parents October - June 2019 Parent Coordinator and Consultant All Students Sept. 2018-June 2019 Attendance Team and Administrators Angela Moses Consulting Enterprise (AMCE) will provide monthly mental health workshops, i.e,Domestic Violence, Raising Boys, Helping Students with Disabilities, etc. This agency will provide referrals to other support groups. The School Leadership Team along with the attendance team develop a plan to increase monthly school-wide attendance by recognizing and rewarding individual as well overall daily class attendance:  Monthly class averages are posted in the school's lobby, Crispus Attucks tickets distributed weekly and class trophies are awarded monthly. Students with perfect monthly attendance are given ribbons at bi-monthly assemblies. Student's names are posted on a monthly hallway display. .Classes with 100% daily attendance and birthdays are publicly recognized on the Public Address System.   3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. CBO- Brooklyn Community Services Angela Moses Enterprise Consultant 2018-19 CEP 29  Chionesu Bakari Bridge Street Mentors Wednesday program Inter-generational collaboration with Brooklyn Gardens Nursing Home Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Per session for extended day facilitators, Pre-k teachers and paraprofessional are used to help facilitate ParentCorp program. The parent coordinator and guidance counselor will work with our Clinical Psychologist-consultant to provide monthly parent workshops, analyze surveys and reflections. Breakfast is provided at each session. Teacher per session is used in an Early Bird session to increase student attendance. Per diem is used for after school programming for Pre-k students attending ParentCorp. Supervisor per session is used to oversee this program. Additional grant monies are used to facilitate supper for parents and siblings attending this evening program. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG X X Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. The attendance sheets and reflection forms will be collected and reviewed after each session. The information collected will determine whether sessions need to be repeated. February 2019 parent involvement has increased with the support of the Mental Health Facilitator and our work with Angela Moses Enterprises to address identifying adolescent stress, cyber-bullying, single-parenting. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. NYU Parent questionaire Feedback forms after each session Principal round table discussion group PTA attendance sheets Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 30  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Mathematics Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Lowest one-third and reading FP 3 levels below target Lowest one-third Science Lowest one-third Social Studies Lowest one-third At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) PBIS data, ACS, SBSTdata Leveled books, close reading, interactive writing Fluency drills, Go Math intervention tools Nonfiction Literature, Pebble Go, Brain Pop Small group Small group Small group Nonfiction Literature, Pebble Go, Brain Pop, Scholastic Small group PBIS program, Behavior modification strategies, teacher volunteers One-to-one, Small group During the school day, Super Thursday Academy During the school day, Super Thursday Academy During the school day, Super Thursday Academy During the school day, Super Thursday Academy During the school day 2018-19 CEP 31  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. At Risk Counseling with on-site guidance counselor 67 students Backpacks and uniforms Recommendations for Family Services to parents Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). n/a 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 CEP 32  n/a 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. n/a 2018-19 CEP 33  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. Teacher facilitated professional learning conducted by our teacher candidates attending the CITE program for school building leadership, acquiring resumes at Hiring Fairs, using Teacher-led Interviews, and differentiated professional development are methods used to retain and ensure highly qualified teachers. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). Paraprofessionals attend UFT sponsored Professional Learning workshops given by NYC DOE Special Education Department and Special Education liaison. Teacher created inter-visitation plan, professional development needs survey,CSD 16 Professional Learning, consultants (Data 4 Teams, AMCE Clinical Psychologist, Jump Math, NYU Technical Assistance Facilitator, FCS Professional learning) are supports given to teachers and school leaders. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. n/a 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). n/a 2018-19 CEP 34  Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). The inclusion of the NYU Medical Center Parent Corps program increases parent involvement and assists parents/students in making transitions. Additionally, this partnership helps to develop the foundational skills for learning and further articulates the Early Childhood Education Pillars of Family Engagement 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. The Mosl Team comprised of 8 staff (4 UFT selections and 4 administrative selections) select 2019 Measure of Student Learning to be attached to teachers overall HEDI ratings. This team also chooses baseline and benchmark assessment measures to be used throughout the year. FSC team provides additional guidance to MOSL team when making selections. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 331,384.00 98,527 0 0 3,183,787.00 x x n/a n/a x Column B Section Reference(s) (5A, 5B, 5C, 5D) (5E) na na (5A-5E) 2018-19 CEP 35  1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated: 2018-19 CEP 36   Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 CEP 37  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. Crispus Attucks Elementary, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Crispus Attucks Elementary will support parents and families of Title I students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; 2018-19 CEP 38  ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; The school’s Parent Involvement Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in 2018-19 CEP 39  the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the ESSA; ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) School-Parent Compact (SPC) Crispus Attucks Elementary, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for 2018-19 CEP 40  improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; 2018-19 CEP 41  ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; Provide general support to parents by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities 2018-19 CEP 42  ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; 2018-19 CEP 43  ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 2018-19 CEP 44  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 16 School Name Crispus Attucks Borough Brooklyn School Number 021 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Leslie Frazier Coach n/a ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher type here Teacher/Subject Area Sasha Sam Teacher/Subject Area Related-Service Provider Kieron Forbes Superintendent Evelyn Santiago Assistant Principal Carla Arnold Coach n/a School Counselor Magali Flowers Parent Celeste Boston PTA Parent Coordinator Linda Sanders Field Support Center Staff Member Olga DeFlipps Other (Name and Title) type here C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 0 0 1 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 569 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] Total number of ELLs 0 0 8 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 1.41% 2018-19 CEP 45  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 1 2 3 4 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? Our school uses Amplify, running records from Learning A-Z, and benchmark assessments in Journey's program for all our our students including ELL's to track early literacy. This assessment indentifies specific areas of literacy where our students can benefit from additional suppport in literacy. We use this data to track classroom instruction and ELL instruction. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? Our school uses ongoing student assessment data to evaluate the success of our programs for ELLs. 2018-19 CEP 46  4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] ESL a. Most of our Ell's are at the beginning level. We find that as students receive additional years of service they advance toward intermediate and advanced levels. By the time our ELLs reach testing grade they are taking State assessments in English. b/c. Our school does not give the ELL periodic assessment. We use amplify assessments and Schoolnet periodic assessment to track progress. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. The majority of our ELL's are newcomers and therefore tend to score at the beginner level. We find that as students receive additional years of service their proficiency levels increase. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. Our students are supported by Sasha Sam, teacher (currently working to obtain TESOL license in May 2016) using a pull-out model to support all mandated students in 16K021. The students are grouped based his/her level of proficiency in ELA based on Amplify assessment data, NYSITELL and/or NYSESLAT scores. The program model is Free Standing ESL Pull Out Model. b. TBE program. If applicable. n/a c. DL program. If applicable. na/a: 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? All ELL studets are held to the same high academic expectations and standards as the monolingual students. All students participate in a ninety minute literacy block, which incorporate the components of the balanced literacy program: read aloud, shared reading, guided reading, partner reading a nd writing workshop in ELA. In the ESL pull out program students are provided with additional support in the four modalities:speaking, listening, reading, and writing. The ESL instructor works colaboratively with other teachers to provide supplemental materials and diferentiation during this time. Mandated minutes are provided for the beginners and intermediates ( 360 minutes per week) and advanced students (180 minutes per week)., as per CR-Part 154. 2018-19 CEP 47  3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. All ELLs participate in content area instruction designed to meet the needs of all students. In addition, ESL instruction is taught through the content areas to ensure students have the language they need and are prepared to meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. Maria Lebron, teacher provides mandated support to the students based on data driven instruction (review of student SchoolNet Assessment and Amplify scores, data analysis of sub skills and student work products). Common Core Learning Standards at each grade level are used to drive the core curriculum along with pacing calendars and curriculum maps to ensure a quality education for mandated student in all of the content areas. ESL instructional methodology and techniques are used to provide assistance in cognitive language acquisition skills for ELL students. Bilingual dictionaries , technology, buddy system and classroom libraries support native language instruction across all content areas. On going assessments and measurable goals help to make content comprehensive in order to enrich language development. Scaffolding strategies are used to support the ELLs through modeling, bridging and contextualization. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? Our ELLs are not currently receiving native language instruction, however we encourage them to use available resources such as bilingual dictionaries, native language libraries and other internet support resources, when appropriate, to facilitate the language acquisition process. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status a: Currently we do no have students who are SIFE. If we had, the instructional plan for SIFE would be one which incorporates at risk counseling services provided by the Guidance Counselor Magali Flowers, to facilitate students' transition to the school environment. b: For students with less than 3 years in the US cooperative play is used as a technique to strengthen social skills as well as self esteem. Lunchroom clubs are facilitated by the guidance counselor to support peer mediation and assimilation to the new environment. c/d: At this time we do have one ELL receiving service four to six years and no Long Term ELLs. The support provided to this student includes (in addition to mandated services) academic intervention services during extended day, thirty-seven and a half minutes and Saturday Academy to support increased academic outcomes. At risk counseling would be provided to support students with coping skills and focus students on healthy social emotional development. Individualized assessments would take place to provide support in the needed sub skills using data driven instruction. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? Our school includes the ESL and AIS provider in the decision making process for ELL-SWDs, in order to ensure that students are receiving appropriate IEP services in the least restrictive environment, in addition to their ESL services. Ongoing communication ensures that students are on track to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? The LPT reviews the IEP goals along with any other Related Service provider to determine if additional services and/or instructional strategies are needed to assist the student in meeting their goals with minimal transitional interruption. i.e. push in model. 2018-19 CEP 48  8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. English is the principle language used to instruct the students. Students are given opportunities to improve vocabulary skills and comprehension skills in all content areas using fiction and nonfiction text, hands on activities in math and science using manipulatives, math games, and lab activities. Students read historical fiction and nonfiction texts in content areas. Students use role playing, video and Achieve 3000 and iReady reading software to reinforce comprehension skills. The development of phonemic awareness, vocabulary development, fluency and comprehension for ELLs is support through Macmillan McGraw-Hill. This program uses small group instruction and direct, explicit instruction in the acquisition of skill sets. All interventions are offered in English. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? As our ELL population continues to grow, we are seeking out certified teachers who can provide additional instructional support for these students. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? No programs will be discontinued. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. ELLs are afforded equal access to all school programs because all students are invited to participate. notices are sent home and programs are introduced and discussed at parent teacher conferences, parent orientation, curriculum nights, and pta meetings. All students are encouraged to participate in sports teams, robotics, cheerleading and various other clubs in the school provided during lunch. ELLs are afforded equal access to all school programs during our extended day program through tryouts or by assignment. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. Students use Achieve 3000 and iReady reading software to reinforce comprehension skills. The development of phonemic awareness, vocabulary development, fluency and comprehension for ELLs is support through Macmillan McGraw-Hill. This program uses small group instruction and direct, explicit instruction in the acquisition of skill sets. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Native Language support is delivered in the Freestanding ESL Model through the use of translated material including dictionaries, books and early reading literacy books. Beginning level students are given help from other students as well as other staff speaking in their native language. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. Yes, required support services and resources are age and grade appropriate. Materials are differentiated, based on student need, but align to age/grade level expectations. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? Students use Achieve 3000 and iReady reading software to reinforce comprehension skills. The development of phonemic awareness, vocabulary development, fluency and comprehension for ELLs is support through Macmillan McGraw-Hill. This program uses small group instruction and direct, explicit instruction in the acquisition of skill sets. 2018-19 CEP 49  16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). In order to assist the smooth transition of newly enrolled ELL students before the beginning of the school year, parents attend a school orientation. Parents and students are introduced to the school community and are informed of the curriculum as well as special programs and initiatives. The goal is to familiarize parents and student with their new school environment. There are parent volunters available to discuss their children's experiences and opportunities provided by their participation in the school programs. Translators are available to enhance parent school communication. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? At this time, we do not offer language electives 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? n/a Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? answers in included in narrator below answers in included in narrator below 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. answers in included in narrator below Throughout the year, professional development opportunities are provided for all teaching staff members. It is available in the school community and by the New York City Department of Education. Ongoing professional development has been focused on the analysis of data, differentiated instruction, and data driven instruction for the entire school community to support the needs of ELLs, diverse learners and improve academic outcomes to meet the minimum 7.5 hours. Many professional development opportunities were available through OELL, QTEL, and R-BERN. The teachers that attend the professional development turnkry the professional development to the school community. Professional Development and support for school staff as per Jose P is provided by teacher, Maria Lebron, administrators and network support. A variety of professional development opportunities are offered to support teachers in learning how to distinguish, identify and support instruction of ELLs. The teachers and guidance counselors collaborate in order to inform students about the transition process at grade level meetings and faculty conferences. The ELLs Coordnator does outreach to parents along with the parent coordinator to inform the parents about this process so that parents are informed. There are parent workshops and announcements and presentations at parent teacher association meeetings. Students and parents attend articulation workshops provided by Magali Flowers, Guidance Counselor as they transition to middle school. Throughout the year, professional development opportunities are provided for all teaching staff members. They are available in the school community and through the Office of English Language Learners. Ongoing professional development has been focused on the analysis of data, differentiated instruction, and data driven instruction for the entire 2018-19 CEP 50  school community to support the needs of ELLs, diverse learners and improve academic outcomes to meet the minimum 7.5 hours (10 hours for special education teachers). Many professional development opportunities were available through OELL, QTEL, and BETAC. The teachers that attend the professional development turnkey the professional development to the school community. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? The Parent Coordinator and LPT schedule meetings quarterly with parents to keep them informed. These meetings are held during Tuesdays Parent Engagement Time. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. The Parent coordinator and Guidance Counselor invite parents to orientation, Parent Tea events, PTA meetings, and Cultural Day activities. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Paste response here: 2018-19 CEP 51 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Leslie Frazier, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 CEP 52  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: Crispus Attucks School DBN: 16K021 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Leslie Frazier Title Principal Carla Arnold Assistant Principal Linda Sanders Parent Coordinator Sasha Sam ENL/Bilingual Teacher Celeste Boston Parent Kieron Forbes Teacher/Subject Area Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach Magali Flowers School Counselor Evelyn Santiago Olga DeFlippis Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member BNFS Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 9/15/15 9/15/15 9/15/15 9/15/15 9/15/15 9/15/15 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 9/15/15 9/15/15 9/15/15 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 2018-19 CEP 53  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 16K School Name: Crispus Attucks Elementary Superintendent: Evelyn Santiago The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No (*Primary) * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. n order to assess our school's written translation and oral interpretation needs to ensure that all parents are provided with appropriate and timely information in a language they can understand we use classroom surveys. Classroom surveys gives us an idea of languages spoken written and read in student's homes. We send a survey home to each of our students inquiring as to whether or not the parent or guardian needed translation services for notices sent home.We also took an inventory of the HLIS for the ELLs in our program. We then tabulated the 2018-19 CEP 54  number of parents that spoke languages other than English and determined that there was a need for translation of notices and information about a child's academic performance, ways to increase student achievement and enchance the parents' understanding of academic standards, assessments and tests. We also provide information on parent communication needs n the Language Allocation Plan for the school. The Guidance Counselor, Parent Coordinator and Bilingual Certified Teacher confer with parents by telephone,and in one to one conferences on their individual communication needs. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Language Our school is located in the Bedford Stuyvesant section of Brooklyn. Recent immigrants to our school speak Arabic. We used our classroom surveys, and the inventory of languages from the HLIS to assess the oral language needs of parents. We found that the major language group is English. There are a few parents that speak Spanish and four families that speak Arabic. Staff members in the school community provide support for translation and interpretation support based on their identified language fluency in Hatian Creole and Spanish. This information was reported to the school community through parent teacher 2018-19 CEP 55  association meetings, faculty conferences and grade level meetings. 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be How do you plan to translate? Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to Families We assessed the number of parents who needed translation services to effectively communicate during Principal Parent Monthly meetings, PTA meetings, curriculum nights and Parent-Teacher conferences. We have staff members who speak Spanish. Written translation is available when needed and the Translation Interpretation Unit is contacted to support school translations. The notices announcing events will be translated in Spanish as needed. ELL's parent orientation materials will also be provided in their native languages. Written translation services will be provided in-house by school staff as needed by teachers and paraprofessionals. The Language Interpretation Unit is utilized for other languages that the school can't provide services for Interpretation. e.g. Arabic. Services in Spanish are available to the parents for various events such as PTA meetings, Family Literacy /Math Nights, Pre-k Parent Corp program, Parent Social Services Workshops, and Parent-Teacher Conferences. Documents that are disseminated annually that require translation include parent handbooks, 2018-19 CEP 56  middle school articulation information, policy information, health and medical information such as 504 notices and medical permissions for the nurses office, state testing information and dates, Common Core information, promotion in doubt information, marketing materials, and letters from the school leadership. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide interpretation service(s)? Our face to face meetings are consistent with the citywide calendar for open school evenings. The first meeting of the year held in September 2015, is a curriculum back to school night. The second meeting held in November is a Fall parent teacher conference night. The third meeting is a Spring parent teacher conference night. The final meeting of the school year held in the Spring is student led conferences where students showcase their learning. In addition to these meetings we have an annual Thanksgiving Community Feast in November in partnership with the local churches. There are also impromptu parent meetings and conferences with the parent coordinator, guidance counselor, attendance coordinator, psychologist, and/or dean during the course of the year. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. 2018-19 CEP 57  Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) In accordance with the Chancellor's regulations welcome posters are posted at the entrance of our school and in the Parent Coordinator's suite. Parents received copies of their Bill of Rights and the Parent Compact. The guide to language access will also be distributed to our families. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? To gather feedback about both the quality and availability of services we will administer an annual parent survey. Each year we review and discuss the results of the survey as a team and reflect on the adjustments that are warranted based on the feedback we have received. 2018-19 CEP 58 
