2018-19 COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (CEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 16K028 School Name: P.S. 028 THE WARREN PREP ACADEMY Principal: JUDITH JAMES 2018-19 CEP 1  Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 CEP 2  School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information The Warren Prep Academy 16K028 331600010028 PreK – 5 School Number (DBN): 1001 Herkimer Street, Brooklyn NY 11233 718-467-2865 Phone Number: 718-953-4189 Fax: Judith James jjames4@schools.nyc.gov Email Address: School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Judith James Tracey Walker JunaPlonquet RamdaiSingh Jennifer Edwards N/A N/A District Information Geographical District: 16 RaheshaAmon Superintendent: 1010 Lafayette Street, Brooklyn NY 11221 Superintendent’s Office Address: RAmon@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718-574-2834 Phone Number: 718-453-1048 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) Brooklyn North Bernadette Fitzgerald FSC: Executive Director: 2018-19 CEP 3  Executive Director’s Office Address: 131 Livingston Street BFitzge2@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 718-935-3954 Phone Number: 718-935-3444 Fax: 2018-19 CEP 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Judith James Tracey Walker JunaPlonquet Cheryl Hutchinson Jennifer Edwards N/A N/A N/A Claricia Felder RamdaiSingh Leonora Mendoza *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable UFT UFT Parent 2018-19 CEP 5  Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) MandisaDecoteau Danielle Marcus Gloria Goodman N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Parent Parent Parent Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ 2018-19 CEP 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with 2018-19 CEP 7  the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement 2018-19 CEP 8  Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Section 4: CEP Overview 2018-19 CEP 9  At PS 28, The Warren Prep Academy, our mission is to teach all the children how to read, write, think, compute, speak well, love the arts and behave in socially acceptable ways in order to become economically, independent, contributing members of society ready to enter college and careers. As a result, we are striving to create an environment that is not only welcoming but one that provides opportunities for students to excel and reach their full potential. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. Currently, this Pre-K to 5 school serves 116 students from Pre-Kindergarten through grade 5. The school is located in Bedford Stuyvesant Brooklyn and comprises of 84% Black, 14% Hispanic, 0% Asian and 0% White. We also have 7.5% ELLs and 18% students with special needs and49% boys, 51% girls. The majority of the students come from low-income families as 94% of our students receive free or reduced-priced lunch. The Warren Prep Academy is embarking on preparing our students to be 21 st Century learners who learn how to be effective learners, communicators, creators and collaborators. We seek first to understand and know our students well and provide them with what they need to thrive and become reflective, tenacious and inquisitive about the world around them. We believe that students learn best when given explicit models and opportunities to practice with guidance and independently. Our school is small but we pride ourselves with being family oriented as many of our students represent generation of families who have attended the school in the past. In spite of this, we still deal with a transient population of students who come and go. This creates a challenge in sustaining a foundation with our students and retaining them until they are able to consistently develop academically from Pre-K to grade 5. We strive to create a learning environment where students are engaged and individual needs are met. This year we are cognizant of our students needs and therefore has included the Framework for Great School element of rigorous instruction as our focus. We see the need to develop critical thinking skills and plan to engage in more intellectual activities that will encourage students to make their thinking visible. As a result, we have established opportunities for our students to tap into their strengths and socio-emotional needs through our various partnerships and initiatives. This year we have established lunch clubs where students can seek out their areas of interest such as dance, drama, music, chess, book club, sports and arts. We partner with Carnegie Hall and the YMCA with the swim for Life program. Every year, students in various grades look forward to their service learning activity in which they visit and perform at the Bishop Huckles Senior Citizen Center. In addition, we are proud of our basketball and cheerleading teams who compete with other schools in the district. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. 2018-19 CEP 10  Students with learning disabilities and English New Language Learners 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. Our school made the greatest progress in the Diagnostic Tool for School District Effectiveness (DTSDE) Tenet 3-Curriculum Development and support. According to our School Quality Guide, areas of celebration are in rigorous, engaging and coherent curricular aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards, curricular-aligned assessment practices that inform instruction, aligned use of resources to support instructional goals that meet students’ needs and structures for positive learning environment, inclusive culture, and student success. The key areas of focus for this school year are contained in DTSDE – Tenet 4; Collaborative Teachers. Teachers will provide coherent, appropriately aligned Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS)-based instruction that leads to multiple points of access for all students to achieve targeted goals. To ensure success on our prioritized goals, we will focus on regular evaluation of school level decisions that support the expectations of the Common Core Learning Standards and research-based, effective instruction that yields high quality student work. With a laser-like focus on our student data, we will ensure that our students are given the opportunities that will prepare them to move on to middle school, continue to high school and enter college and eventually careers. 2018-19 CEP 11  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 16K028 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration PK,0K,01,02,03,04,05 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 134 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 19 19 8 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 9 8 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) 8 8 School Composition (2017-18) 95.0% % Attendance Rate 91.8% % Reduced Lunch 8.2% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.0% 16.4% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 0.7% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 4.1 0% 15% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 35.7% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 85% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) Yes Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A N/A N/A N/A YES Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A YES Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A YES High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 11 11 8 89.5% 3.0% 29.1% 82.8% 0.0% 0.0% 2 5% 6.7 38.4% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No YES N/A N/A N/A YSH YES N/A N/A N/A YSH YES N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 CEP 12  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. In our self-reflection on Tenet 3, we observed an area of strength to be the quality and implementation of a systematic plan that addresses organized curriculum maps reflecting the common core standards. These maps are adjusted based on daily lessons and examining of student work. Teachers have aligned units and lesson plans that are data driven and are appropriately aligned to the common core standard. This work has impacted the students 2017 - 2018 state assessments performance which demonstrated an increase in meeting the standards by a +5% on ELA standards and +13% on Math. Through the learning cycle framework of teacher teams, formative and summative assessments are used to create action plans that support long and short term goals to address student learning. This work has helped to improve the instructional practices by targeting priority standards. ● According to the 2017 - 2018 NYC School Survey 94% - 100% of teachers reported that they had the tools necessary for students to interact with academic language and complex grade level text. However, 29% of teachers report that more resources and tools are needed in order to create coherent progressions within the standards from current grade to next grades in math. ● According to the NYC 2017 - 2018 survey, more than 90% of parents are satisfied with their child's education in which increased from the previous year. 89% of staff agrees that leaders place a high priority on the quality of teaching. Priority need According to the Capacity Framework Element – Rigorous Instruction, current data from Advance and our recent Quality Review Report 1.2, there is need to improve quality of lessons that attend to text-based discussions and students communicating about their learning. Students should be able to make their thinking visible through questioning, discussions and reflection based on quality feedback from their peers and teachers. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. 2018-19 CEP 13  By June 2019, all students will show 3% improved performance on content based writing performance task between benchmark assessments 3 times a year ( BOY, MOY and EOY). 2018-19 CEP 14  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Instructional Actions/ Strategies  Teacher teams will meet weekly to revise and adjust the school’s existing curriculum maps to reflect alignment with CCLS standards. All Staff Members Weekly Grade Level Team Leaders,  Teacher teams will plan daily lessons that will embed questions that lead to higher order thinking through the use of discussion protocols based on the D.O.K taxonomy and the Hess matrix. Sept 2018 - Dec 2018 Teacher Teams, Administration Teacher Teams Weekly Grade Level Leaders, Sept 2018 -June 2019 Teacher Teams, Administration Students Daily Teachers Sept 2018- June 2019 Teachers Instructional Support Personnel  Students will continue to use, with teacher guidance and support, accountable talk prompts posted in the classroom to initiate discussions guided and supported by teachers using best practices.  Teacher Teams will meet weekly to develop student friendly checklist and rubrics to assess their levels of engaging discussion.  Administrative staff will conduct weekly learning walks to collect low inference data about student use of accountable talk in the classroom.  Provide staff with actionable and timely feedback connected to student data and professional development. 2018-19 CEP 15   Administrative staff and Facilitator from the Office of Teacher Leadership, will identify classes that showcase effective practices and use them as lab sites to enhance teacher pedagogy. Teacher Teams Weekly Sept 2018-April 2019 Grade Level Team Leaders, Teacher Teams Administration  Utilize Compass Learning and MYON Reader platforms to Teachers Weekly target student's identified needs within the grade level. Selected Classroom Teachers  Power Brain Education (PBE) Student Training and implementation of PBE Program with students.  Mastery Connect Program will be used by teachers to Teachers track student achievement in the Common Core Learning Standards for ELA and Math. Sept 2018- May 2019 Administration Weekly Sept 2018-May 2019 Selected Classroom Teachers Administration Bi-weekly Facilitator from the Office of Teacher Leadership Teachers Monthly Students Sept 2018- May 2019 Selected Classroom Teachers Teachers Classroom Teachers Weekly Sept 2018- June 2019 Daily Classroom Teachers 2018-19 CEP 16  Students November 2018- June 2019 Students Professional Development  Teachers will engage in weekly professional Teachers Daily Classroom Teachers Weekly Monthly Sept 2018- June 2019 development around unpacking the CCLS standards to create long term and short term learning targets.  Teachers will use the data tool, Mastery Connect to track and monitor student's progress within the standards. Teachers Weekly Sept 2018 -June 2019 Grade Level Teams & Team Leaders Administration  Grade Teams will meet with Math & Assessment Matters Weekly Teachers Coach to Plan and execute lessons that are aligned to CCLS standards and student's data.  Teachers will utilize the Hess Cognitive Rigor Matrix to formulate questions and activities that encourage discussion in the classrooms.  Teacher teams will work together to become knowledgeable in ELA Instructional Shift #4, text based answers by unpacking and viewing lessons that incorporate the elements of the shift.  Teachers will review the effective and highly effective Teacher Teams Sept 2018-June 2019 Administration Monthly Sept 2017-June 2018 Teacher Teams & Grade Team Leaders Administration criterion as enumerated by the Danielson Framework for Teaching, 3B, Questioning and Discussion. Teachers Daily & Weekly Teacher Teams & Grade Team Leaders 2018-19 CEP 17   Teachers will determine research-based strategies for meeting the needs of all learners, ELLs, Students with special needs criterion as enumerated by the Danielson Framework for Teaching, 3B, Questioning and Discussion.  Provide teachers with training to implement the Compass Learning Program. Teacher Teams & Team Leaders Sept 2018- June 2019 Weekly Sept 2018- Jan. 2019  Power Brain Education- Teacher Training and Program Teachers Implementation Teacher Teams & Grade Team Leaders Administration  Data Discussions focusing on analyzing student data in ELA, Math and Science across the school, grade levels, specific classes and student cohorts will be held during weekly Admin Prep and Professional Development meetings.  Teachers will be trained in the use of the Mastery Connect Program so that they will be able to track student achievement in the Common Core Learning Standards for ELA and Math. Weekly Sept 2018- May 2019 Teachers Administration Teachers Weekly Instructional Support Personnel Sept 2018-May 2019 Teachers Administration Teachers Teachers Sept 2018- October 2019 Sept. 2018- November 2019 Instructional Support Staff Teachers Administration 2018-19 CEP 18  Addressing Student Needs  Teachers will use concept maps, graphic organizers and task cards to help students connect information that would assist them in order to have rich discussions. Accommodations for SwDs and ELL students will be embedded through the use of tiered learning supports. Program Facilitator Weekly or Administration Teachers Monthly Instructional Support Staff Sept 2018- June 2019 Teachers October 2018 Administration Administration Teachers Daily Teacher Teams Instructional Support Staff Sept 2018- June 2019 Grade Team Leaders Administration  Teachers will provide more wait time, about 3-5 seconds to allow students to have higher cognitive discussions through think, pair and share.  Teachers will utilize UDL strategies to plan instruction for all students with accommodations for SwDs and ELL students embedded into their lessons. Teachers Daily  Use question prompts to scaffold students' thinking and reasoning, with accommodations for SwDs and ELL Sept 2018- June 2019 Teachers 2018-19 CEP 19  students embedded into the type of questions these students are asked.  Use thinking maps to support cognitive development of all students including SwDs and ELLs based on their IEP goals or language proficiency goals. Teachers  Provide academic vocabulary to engage students in cognitively rich discussions and to enhance comprehension of information.  Use of technology to engage all learners in ELA and Math programmed instruction activities as well as individual learning extension activities.  ELLs- Push-in classroom instructional support for mandated students. Teachers  ELLs- Bilingual materials, translation materials and/ or Teachers classroom "centers" for ELA and Math learning support.  ELLs- "Student friendly" checklists and rubrics that support ELL student learning of ELA and Math information.   SwDs- Curriculum maps in all core subjects that include tiered assignments for SwDs relative to their IEP Annual Goals. SwDs- "Student friendly" checklists and rubrics that support the learning needs of SwDs for ELA and Math information. Teachers Daily Sept 2018- June 2019 Daily Sept 2018- June 2019 Daily Sept 2018- June 2019 Daily Sept 2018- June 2019 Daily Sept 2018- June 2019 Teachers Teachers Teachers Teachers 2018-19 CEP 20 Teachers   SwDs- Classroom Learning Centers with tiered assignments in ELA and Math for students of varying ability levels. ELL Teacher Gen. Ed. & ELL Teacher Gen.Ed. & ELL Teacher Gen.Ed. & Daily Sept 2018- June 2019 Daily Teachers ELL Teacher Sept 2018- June 2019 Gen. Ed.Teachers Daily Sept 2018- June 2019 ELL & Gen. Ed.Teachers Daily Sept 2018- June 2019 Spe. Ed/ Daily Teacher Sept 2018- June 2019 Gen. Ed. & Spe. Ed. Teacher Daily ELL & Gen. Ed.Teachers Gen. Ed. Teachers Special Ed. Teachers Sept 2018 - June 2019 Gen. Ed. Teachers Special Ed. Teachers 2018-19 CEP 21  Parent Involvement and engagement  Parents As Learning Partners Program with focus on in classroom support for students.  Parent As Learning Partners Academies- providing in-classroom support for students and teachers.  CCLS/ Instructional Shifts in ELA Workshops for Parents (initial focus will be on Instructional Shift #4- Creating Text-based Answers) for parents and providing them with resources for home instruction. Gen. Ed. & Spe. Ed. Teacher Initial meeting Gen. Ed. Teachers Special Ed. Teachers Sept 2018 Parent Coordinator Parents Teachers Bi-weekly Sept 2018- June 2019 At least 4X during the 2017-18 school year. Parent Coordinator Parents Teachers Sept 2018- June 2019 Administration Parent Coordinator 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight.  CCLS/ Instructional Shifts in ELA Workshops for Parents (initial focus will be on Instructional Shift #4- Creating Text-based Answers) for parents and providing them with resources for home instruction. Sept 2017- June 2018   Administration Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 2018-19 CEP 22  ● Administrative staff and teacher leaders will provide professional development, modeling and materials for staff ● The Danielson Framework , Copies of the Instructional Shifts in Literacy and the Hess Cognitive Rigor Matrix will be used ● The use of resources such as videos from Teacher Channel and Engage NY will be utilized ● Time on Mondays will be designated for teacher team meetings. Pay substitutes for teachers to attend PD ● Other Than Personnel Services (OTPS) for consumable materials and workshop materials for both staff and students such as lap tops for digital platforms, i.e Compass Learning, ThinkCentral, ThinkCerca, MyOn ● Coaching with adjusting and reviewing curriculum maps 1. ● NTN Coach, Teaching Matters, Assessment Matters Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA X Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. ● By February 2019, students should demonstrate improvement on 3 writing traits aligned to CCLS writing tasks as compared to beginning of year and benchmark CCLS aligned assessments. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) NYS Writing Performance Tasks Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 23  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? In our self-reflection, we noticed that though each class has addressed specific expected behaviors in our mantra; be safe, be resilient, be respectful, be responsible, be kind. To further internalized the characteristics of the mantra as it relates to making acceptable choices we see the need to implement a school-wide incentive system to reward and encourage students to continue to display acceptable behavior. We see the need for a school-wide system where all stakeholders can be involved. The following strengths connected with the Capacity Framework Element – Supportive Environment, were identified: According to the 2018 NYC School Survey, ● 93% of the parent body feels that the school keeps them informed about services for their children such as tutoring, after-school programs, or workshops at school. ● 95% of the parent body feels that our school has high expectations for our students. ● 95% of the parent body feels that our school makes students and parents feel welcome The following needs connected with the Capacity Framework Element – Supportive Environment, were identified: According to the School Quality Snapshot, ● 67% of staff would recommend the school to parents ● 79% of staff feel that order and disciplined are maintained Priority Need Based on the findings of the 2018 NYC School Survey, the Elementary School Quality Snapshot, there is a need for our school community to continue improving our social and emotional environment. Part 2 – Annual Goal 2018-19 CEP 24  Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, in collaboration with teachers and administrative staff, Power Brain Wellness principles will be implemented resulting in a 50% decrease in classroom reported incidents as measured by the Online Occurrence Reporting System from school year 2017 – 2018 to school year 2018 – 2019. 2018-19 CEP 25  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Instructional Actions/Strategies/Activities ● Power Brain Wellness (PBW) Program- a school wide self-improvement program that teaches Teachers & Parapro-fessionals children and adults focus, self-confidence, memory Weekly Sept 2018-October 2018 PBW Program Facilitator training, creativity and emotional wellness. Teacher Weekly ● Student Incentive Programs to highlight students' talents and leadership abilities. -Student of the Month Awards -Monthly Attendance Awards -Academic Achievement Awards Mentors Students All Students October 2018- November 2018 PBW Program Facilitator Teachers Teacher Mentors Monthly Sept 2018- June 2019 Administration Teachers Marking Periods Sept 2018- June 2019 Administration Teachers 2018-19 CEP 26  -AM Student Announcers Grade K- 5 Students Daily Sept 2018- June 2019 Music Teacher Last Friday Monthly Grade 3- 5 Students Sept 2018- June 2019 Administration Teachers First Students All Students Sept 2018- June 2019 ● Behavior Expectations Assembly Programs- featuring special performances focusing on the Virtue of the Month, to promote character development, responsibility, school spirit and cooperation. ● School wide "Town Hall" Assemblies- to present and discuss the Virtue of the Month, how it will positively impact student behavior, functioning and school environment ● School wide Mantra/ Matrix of Acceptable Behaviors- to promote character development, responsibility, success strategies and cooperation. All Students Friday Monthly Daily Sept 2018-June 2019 Administration Teachers Students Daily Support Administration Sept 2018- Teachers June 2019 Students All Students Monthly 2018-19 CEP 27  ● Crisis Intervention Team- to support students and teachers in volatile and/ or crisis situations. The Crisis Intervention Team also meets every 6 weeks to review and analyze work as well as intervention strategies. Teachers Parapro- fessionals Sept 2018- June 2019 Guidance Counselor Teachers Paraprofessionals Administration ● Principal's Advisory Supportive Environment Committee- Support Staff Selected Teachers to promote trust, cooperation and professional collegiality among all staff members. Professional Development ● Power Brain Wellness (PBW) Program implementation Teachers Weekly Parapro-fessionals Sept 2018- October Teacher Mentors 2018 Weekly October 2018- November 2018 Weekly PBW Program Facilitator PBW Program Facilitator Teachers Sept 2018- June 2019 Administration training. ● Power Brain Wellness (PBW) Program implementation training. ● Positive Behavior In Schools (PBIS) Program- Teachers 2018-19 CEP 28  staff training to focus on the program's tenets, principles, and how it can positively impact the school community. Develop a PBIS Team that will facilitate program implementation/ evaluation for the duration of the 2016-17 school year. ● PBIS Team site visits to other schools to observe how the PBIS Program is organized, and its impact on the school community. ● Use Principal's Advisory Supportive Environment Committee's suggestions, ideas and decisions to organize special staff events, and to hold support/ feedback meetings to increase professional collegiality, trust and collaboration among all staff members. Teachers All Staff Members ● Child Abuse & Neglect Workshop- Identify signs of child abuse and/or neglect in students. Para-professionals Bi-monthly Administration PBIS Team Members Bi-monthly or more frequently if needed. Administration PBIS Team Members Teachers Paraprofessionals Support Staff Profess- ional Development Day, Oct 2018 Administration Guidance Counselor NYCDOE Protocols and regulations for how to address student and family in crisis. 2018-19 CEP 29  Addressing Student Needs ● Use of the Pre-Referral Intervention Manual (PRIM) as All Students Daily Guidance Counselor Weekly Crisis Intervention Monthly Team Members a resource guide to create and provide intervention strategies for general education students, and for students with disabilities. ● Daily Check-Ins- Guidance Counselor will check-in and meet with At Risk students on a daily basis, to discuss behavior, any other concerns, to implement intervention strategies and to continue support strategies for specific students. ● Student Council Election & Student Council- Will develop student leadership qualities; plan & imple- ment special events/ programs for students; create structures for student leadership, personal growth, development, responsibility and support for the school community. ● School wide Mantra/ Matrix of Acceptable Behaviors, When needed Sept 2018- June2019 At Risk Students in general or special Daily & When needed education classes All Students All Sept 2018- June 2019 Weekly Monthly Sept 2018- June2019 Students Daily Sept 2018- June 2019 All Students Guidance Counselor Crisis Intervention Team Members Parent Coordinator All Students Student Leaders ELL Teacher 2018-19 CEP 30  will also be recreated with visuals, to support ELL Students. ● Student Incentives, Awards Assemblies, Special Recognition (ie. Moving Up Ceremonies) & Holiday Programs- To encourage academic achievement, acceptable behaviors, student leadership & responsibility, recognize academic effort & progress, to display students' talents. Parent Involvement ● Parents As Learning Partners Program will be Parents established to train parents as classroom and student Students academic support "assistants." Monthly Classroom Teachers Marking Periods End of School Year Administration Sept 2018- June 2019 Teachers Student Council Leaders Selected Students Daily In-Classroom Support Bi-weekly Training Weekly Monthly Administration Parent Coordinator Teachers ●Special Topic Parent Workshops with focus on academic Parents Administration requirements, standardized test preparation, student ELA & Math data, current grade and/ or next grade level expectations, student school success strategies. As needed Sept 2018- June 2019 Weekly Monthly Parent Coordinator Teacher Team leaders Teachers ● Parent Invitations to assembly programs, special Parents As needed 2018-19 CEP 31  exhibits showcasing students' talents, and family/ school community events. ●Parent invitations to "Family Engagement Nights" Parents acitvities like- Movie Night, Game Night, Art Night, Fitness Night, Curriculum Night, to promote greater home/ school communication, partnership and support. ●Nutrition and Food Preparation Workshop for Parents Parents sponsored by Cornell University- This series of workshops will teach parents how to identify, select and prepare different types of vegetables, as well as how to create nutritional meals. At the end of this series each parent will receive New York State Certification in Food Preparation. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Sept 2018- June 2019 Administration Parent Coordinator Weekly Monthly As needed Sept 2018- June 2019 Teachers Students Administration Parent Coordinator Weekly Sessions 7 Weeks Teachers Selected Students November 2018- January 2019 Administration Parent Coordinator Program Facilitators from Cornell University How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Parent Invitations to assembly programs, special exhibits showcasing students' talents, and family/ school community events. 2018-19 CEP 32  Weekly Monthly As needed Sept 2018- June 2019 Administration Parent Coordinator Teachers Students Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Incentives for PBIS store. Materials to launch Positive Behaviors in Schools program. Funding for Power Brain workshops and materials. Per session and per diem for teachers Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA X Title II, Part A SIG PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Decreased classroom reported interruptions by 5% by February 2019 as compared to Online Occurrence Reporting System data from February 2018. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. OORS REPORTS Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 33  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. In our self-reflection, we observed that though the school has implemented common core aligned curriculum materials, data from observations demonstrate the need for lessons to provide targeted instruction based on student needs. Teacher Teams are meeting but we are working on planning instruction that addresses a variety of needs and learning styles providing access for all learners. The following strengths connected to Capacity Framework element – Collaborative Teachers, were identified: According to the 2017-2018 NYC School Survey, ● 100% of teachers use assessments that are relevant to daily instruction ● 95% of teachers feel that time for collaboration among teachers is provided The following needs connected to the Capacity Framework element – Collaborative Teachers, were identified: ● State Assessment Data demonstrates that 11% of students met the standards for ELA and 6% met for Math. ● According to the 2017 – 2018 NYC School Survey , 89% of teachers said that they trust each other. ● According to the 2017 Quality Review, “In some classrooms visited, the teaching strategies employed were conducted mostly in whole group settings and discussions consisted mainly of answering teachers directed questions that generated minimally thoughtful conversations and student interactions.” ● Teachers Teams are not as adept to using data to drive their planning and collaborating around strategies for improvement in student performance. Priority Need According to the NYC School Survey and 2017 Quality Review, we have come to the conclusion that we need to provide teachers with time to collaborate professionally to use instructional practices and strategies based on actionable feedback from Advance observations. Feedback will focus on making adjustments to instruction that are adaptive and aligned to plans for groups of students with a variety of needs and learning styles, reflecting multiple entry points of access for all students. Part 2 – Annual Goal 2018-19 CEP 34  Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 100% of teachers should move at least one level on the HEDI scale in component 3D, Using Assessment in Instruction as a result of teacher team planning cycle around implementing assessment strategies which will result in a 10% increase in student Fountas and Pinnell Reading levels. 2018-19 CEP 35  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Activities and Strategies  Teachers will continue to plan CCLS infused lessons using the researched based programs, Go Math and Ready Gen for Math and Reading instruction, respectively. Teachers Daily Administration Weekly Admin Prep Meetings Grade Team Meetings Sept 2018- June 2019 Daily Weekly Admin Prep Meetings Grade Team Meetings Grade Team Leaders Teachers Teachers Administration Sept 2018- June 2019 Daily Weekly Admin Prep Meetings Grade Team Leaders Teachers  Lesson Planning will include CCLS Instructional Shifts for Math and ELA (ie. verbal & written responses to informational readings using text based answers.)  Teachers will create and use rubrics specifically aligned with New York State ELA and Mathematics Assess-ments. 2018-19 CEP 36  They will also design student assignments based on these rubrics and use them to evaluate student work artifacts.  Data Discussions focusing on analyzing student data in ELA, Math and Science across the school, grade levels, specific classes and student cohorts will be held during weekly staff and grade cohort meetings. This information will be used to further address the learning needs of students in these subject areas.  Mastery Connect Program will be used by teachers so that they can track student achievement in the Common Core Learning Standards for ELA, Math, Science and Social Studies.  Passport to Social Studies Program will be used by teachers to improve student achievement in Social Studies through the design and implementation of CCLS based learning activities. Grade Team Meetings Sept 2018- June 2019 Teachers Daily Administration Teachers Weekly Admin Prep Meetings Grade Team Meetings Sept 2018- June 2019 Daily Weekly Monthly Admin Prep Period October 2018- Grade Team Leaders Teachers Administration June 2019 Grade Team Leaders Teachers Weekly- Admin Preps Monthly October 2018- June 2019 2018-19 CEP 37   WRITE STEPS school wide writing program will focus on grammar, vocabulary and writing fundamentals to increase and enhance student writing skills. Weekly- Teachers Admin Administration Preps Grade Team Leaders Monthly Teachers Sept 2018- June 2019 Teachers Administration Teachers Parapro-fessionals Program Facilitator Teachers Administration Program Facilitator Teachers Professional Development  Ongoing Teacher training in lesson design and implementation of Go Math and Ready Gen for Math and Reading instruction, respectively. 2018-19 CEP 38   How to Use CCLS Instructional Shifts for Mathematics and ELA (ie. verbal & written responses to informational readings using text based answers.) for lesson planning, and implementing learning activities.  Creating and Using rubrics specifically aligned with New York State ELA and Mathematics assessments as well as the CCLS for instruction and student work artifacts evaluation.  How to Use Data Protocols to analyze individual, grade level, and/ or school wide data to support instruction and provide actionable feedback to students.  Data Analysis Meetings- focusing on analyzing student data in ELA, Math and Science across the school, grade levels, specific classes and student cohorts. This information will be used to further address the learning needs of students in these subject areas.  Mastery Connect Program Teacher Training- to track student achievement in the Common Core Learning Standards for ELA, Math, Science and Social Studies. Teachers Teachers Teachers Teachers Daily Administration Parapro- Weekly Program Facilitator fessionals Monthly Teachers As Needed Sept 2018- May 2019 Daily Teachers Weekly Administration Parapro- Monthly Teachers fessionals As Needed Sept 2018- May 2019 Daily Weekly Monthly Administration As Needed Teachers Sept 2018- June 2019 Daily Weekly Monthly As Needed Administration Sept 2018- Teachers 2018-19 CEP 39  Teachers Teachers Teachers Parapro- fessionals Pre-K Teacher & Parapro-fessional Physical Education Teacher Teachers Teachers June 2019 Weekly Monthly As Needed Sept 2018- June 2019 Administration Daily Weekly Monthly As Needed October 2018- June 2019 Weekly As Needed Nov. 2018- June 2019 Teachers Administration Program Facilitators Teachers Administration Teachers  Passport to Social Studies Program will be used by teachers to improve student achievement in Social Studies through the design and implementation of CCLS based learning activities.  WRITE STEPS school wide writing program will focus on grammar, vocabulary and writing fundamentals to increase and enhance student writing skills.  NYCDOE Pre-K For All In-service Teacher Training Seminars  NYCDOE Physical Education In-service Teacher Training Seminars  Compass Learning Program In-service Teacher Training Seminars that focus on systems and protocols for tracking student academic progress.  Classroom and teacher team inter-visitations 2018-19 CEP 40  Daily Weekly Monthly As Needed October 2018- June 2019 Sept 2018- May 2019 Sept 2018- June 2019 Sept 2018- June 2019 Feb 2018 - May 2019 Administration Program Facilitator Teachers Pre-K Teacher Pre-K Paraprofessional Physical Education Teacher Teacher Turn-Key Facilitators 2018-19 CEP 41  Teacher Teams, Teacher Leadership Coach, NTN Coach, Teachers for/ with Daily Administration Weekly Teacher Teams Students Monthly Teachers Admin Prep Period Sept 2018- June 2019 Daily Teachers Weekly for/ with Monthly Students As Teacher Teams Teachers Needed Sept 2018- June 2019 Daily Weekly Addressing Student Needs  Teachers will create CCLS infused lessons representative of the Instructional Shifts in ELA and Math, using the researched based programs Go Math and Ready Gen. They will explicitly teach academic vocabulary to enhance student learning and mastery.  Teachers will integrate oral and written language instruction into all content area teaching to enhance student learning and mastery of all core subject areas. They will also use tools such as, concrete and visual models (ie. graphic organizers), leveled books, tiered assignments and multi-media displays to support student learning.  Teachers will create classroom centers using tiered assignments, leveled books, audio-visual programs, and multi-media displays to meet the varied learning needs/ styles of their IEP and ELL students.  Teachers will use Universal Design for Learning to plan lessons that provide access to all learners. Their lessons will include support for ELLs and IEP students such as:  Push-in classroom instructional support for mandated students in collaboration with the ELL teacher  Bilingual materials, translation materials and/ or special classroom "centers" for ELA and Math learning support. 2018-19 CEP 42  "Student friendly" checklists and rubrics that support specific learning needs of ELLs and SwDs for ELA and Math information. Teachers for IEP & ELL Students Monthly IEP Teacher As ELL teacher  Ongoing data discussions focusing on analyzing student data in ELA, Math and Science across grade levels, specific classes and student cohorts to further address the learning needs of all students in these subject areas, and to create modifications for ELL and IEP students where mandated.  Use of Mastery Connect Program by individual teachers and Teacher Teams so that they can track and analyze student achievement in the Common Core Learning Standards for ELA, Math, Science and Social Studies.  Teacher Teams will use the WRITE STEPS school wide writing program to analyze the grammar, vocabulary and writing skills of their students, so that they can prioritize their instructional focus based on students' needs. Teachers for IEP & ELL Students Teacher Teams Needed Classroom Teachers Sept 2018- June 2019 Daily Weekly Monthly IEP Teacher As ELL teacher Needed Classroom Teachers Sept 2018- June 2019 Individual Daily Teachers Weekly Monthly Teacher Teams As Teachers Needed Sept 2018- June 2019 2018-19 CEP 43  Teacher Teams Weekly Monthly Individual Teachers Teacher Teams Individual Teachers Parent Involvement  School wide Informational Calendar As Teacher Teams Needed Teachers Sept 2018- June 2019 Weekly Monthly As Teacher Teams Needed Teachers Sept 2018- June 2019  School wide Informational Newsletters Students June 2019 Parent Coordinator Parents Sept 2018- Administration  Parents As Learning Partners Academies- providing in-classroom support for students and teachers. Parents will function as "classroom assistants" to support student learning. Parents Sept 2018- Administration Students June 2019 parent Coordinator Teachers Parents Sept 2018- Administration  Parent Outreach & Communication Protocols- phone and in-school ongoing conferences with parents and various 2018-19 CEP 44 school personnel to ensure that all students have successful academic and social experiences at the Warren Prep Academy. Students June 2019 Parent Coordinator Teachers Parents Sept 2018- Administration Students June 2019 Parent Coordinator Guidance Counselor Teachers 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight.  Parents As Learning Partners Academies- providing in-classroom support for students and teachers. Parents will function as "classroom assistants" to support student learning. Sept 2018 - June 2019   Administration Parent Coordinator Teachers Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Teachers and students must have curriculum materials needed for their course of study Curriculum Binders must be up to date. Teachers must have access to IEP Teachers must have access to technology. Prep schedule will provide time for common planning as well use of Monday 80 minute PD Per diem and per session 2018-19 CEP 45  Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, teachers will demonstrate improvement in 2 out of 4 indicators within the component of 3D as measured by the Advance rating scale. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Advance rating scale to compare performance on observations Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 46  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. In our self-reflection, we observed that all teachers final MOTP rating fell in the effective effective. We feel that in order to gain further improvement in student performance, observation feedback must be targeted with follow up support to ensure that actionable feedback is implemented to impact student achievement. The following strengths connected to Capacity Framework Element – Collaborative Teachers, were identified: ● Based on the NYC School Survey, 89% of the teachers say that the Principal places a high priority on the quality of teaching. 84% felt that school leaders give regular and helpful feedback about their teaching. The following needs connected to Capacity Framework element – Collaborative Teachers, were identified: ● Current School Advance Measure of Teacher Practice (MOTP) report demonstrates that Component 3B – Questioning and Discussion Techniques and 3C Engaging Students in Learning, are the lowest rated components in the school. In order to impact those components, there will be a focus on component 1E - Planning and Preparation. ● New York State Assessment Data Analysis . According to our 2017 - 2018 NYS assessment data, 31% of our students are meeting the State Standards on the State English Test. Priority Need According to the Capacity Framework Element – Effective School Leadership, current data from Advance and our recent Quality Review Report, school leaders must ensure that there is an instituted plan and implementation for observing and providing actionable feedback on teaching practice to impact student achievement. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound.  By June 2019, administrators will provide targeted professional development and actionable feedback to improve teacher pedagogy that results in a 10% increase in student performance on ELA and Math EOY benchmark assessments. 2018-19 CEP 47  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Instructional Actions/Strategies/Activities     Initial Planning Conference to focus on the following salient topics: School Mission & Vision for 2018-2019 school year Student proficiency data in ELA & Math from the previous school year and its impact on instruction for 2018-19 School wide accomplishments & challenges as outlined in the 2016-17 Quality Review  Other school wide initiatives that will improve the learning environment for all students  Mid-Year Planning Conference to focus on the following  salient topics: Student proficiency data in ELA & Math from teacher made exams, unit tests, benchmark exams, and other measures of student academic progress from Sept. 2018 through January 2019.  Changes and augmentation in teacher pedagogy relative to current student learning needs, based on exam data.  Other school wide initiatives that will support student achievement and the learning environment for all students.  End-of-Year Planning Conference to focus on the   following salient topics: Student proficiency data in ELA & Math for the current school year and its impact on instruction for 2018-19 School wide accomplishments & challenges as outlined in the 2016-17 Quality Review  Curriculum Planning & Maps in all core subjects for 2018-19 the school year Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Teachers Sept 2018 Administration: Parapro-fessionals January 2019 Teachers Parapro-fessionals Principal Assistant Principal Administration: Principal Assistant Principal 2018-19 CEP 48   Other school wide initiatives that will improve the learning environment for all students in the 2018-19 school year.  Monthly Updates & Planning Conferences- Focus will be on Beginning of Year, Mid-Year, Periodic Assessment and other student data in ELA and Math, to ensure that teacher pedagogical practices are relevant and commensurate with student learning needs as evidenced by the data.  Administrators will conduct formal and informal observations of teacher practices in accordance with Advance procedures, using Danielson's Framework for Teaching as a diagnostic and evaluative tool.  Actionable & Timely Feedback- Will be provided to individual and groups of teachers to ensure that they augment and/ or change their pedagogical practices in consonance with Danielson's Framework for Teaching and to more effectively meet student learning needs and styles.  Targeted Topics Professional Development Seminars: These sessions will address areas of teacher practice needed to ensure that all students and subgroups identified in the most recent SQR as high needs or special learners, have their learning needs and requirements met with in the teaching/ learning environment.  Administrators will identify classes with effective to highly effective practices as a Lab Site classroom. Colleagues may observe "best instructional practices" and will be encouraged incorporate them into their own pedagogical repertoire.  Parent Outreach & Communication Protocols- phone and in-school ongoing conferences with parents and various Teachers Parapro-fessionals May & June 2019 Sept 2018- June 2019 Teachers Sept 2018-May 2019 Administration: Principal Assistant Principal Administration: Principal Assistant Principal 2018-19 CEP 49  school personnel to ensure that all students have successful academic and social experiences at the Warren Prep Academy.  Parent Outreach & Communication Protocols- phone and in-school ongoing conferences with parents and various school personnel to ensure that all students have successful academic and social experiences at the Warren Prep Academy. Teachers Sept 2018-May 2019 Sept 2018- June 2019 Oct 2018- Teachers May 2019 Teachers Administration: Principal Administration: Principal Administration: Principal Assistant Principal 2018-19 CEP 50  Teachers Administration: Principal Assistant Principal Administrators, Lead Teachers Administrators, Lead Teachers Professional Development Teachers Sept 2018  Administrators will engage in inquiry based book study about effective instructional practices  Principal collaborates with colleagues around improving Nov 2018 leadership skills and teacher practice.  Teachers will engage in professional development around Universal Design for Learning to meet the needs of all learners when planning and delivering instruction  Teachers plan and make modifications for students with disabilities and English Language Learners and use when planning lessons  Teachers will use resources form Engage NY, Teaching Channel, Vimeo that support the implementation of the Danielson’s Framework to view best practices in domain 3B Questioning and Discussion Techniques and 3C Engaging Students in Learning Addressing Student Needs Teacher, Students ● Teachers will incorporate use of accountable talk stems to encourage engaging discussions ● Students will receive student checklist aligned to rubric for engaging in discussions ● Provide multiple entry points for students Feb 2019 May 2019 Sept 2018 Oct 2018 ● Use Universal Design for Learning to plan activities that will be suitable for all learners. Mar 2019 Use multiple mediums to present information Build schema Parent Involvement Parents Sept 2018  Parents are invited to PALP (Parents as Learning Partners) to view classroom activities and discussions. Administrators, Parent Coordinator, Teachers, Instructional Coach 2018-19 CEP 51 Parents are given materials and resources on how to ask higher order thinking questions and strategies on how to engage in discussions at home. Parent Coordinator Nov 2018 May 2019 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight.  Parents are invited to PALP (Parents as Learning Partners) to view classroom activities and discussions. Parents are given materials and resources on how to ask higher order thinking questions and strategies on how to engage in discussions at home. Sept 2018 Nov 2018 May 2019   Administrators, Parent Coordinator, Teachers, Instructional Coach Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. ● Administrative and lead teachers will provide professional development, modeling and materials for staff ● The Danielson Framework, copies of the shift in literacy, Hess Cognitive Rigor Matrix ● The use of NYCDOE resources such as Engage NY and videos from VIMEO and Teaching Channel OTPS for consumable materials and workshop materials for both staff and students Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Supervisors assess staff progress after each round of observation and uses information to adjust Professional Development opportunities. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. observations tracker and professional development Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 52  2018-19 CEP 53  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. In our self-reflection, parent attendance has increased at school wide events that include student performances. We will continue to expand our monthly activities to address CCLS aligned concepts to help our parents assist with their children’s academic progress. Therefore, we must communicate with parents so they understand the impact of their support on their children’s performance and the necessity of attending monthly school events. The following strengths connected to the Capacity Framework – Strong Family and Community Ties, were identified NYC School Survey 2017-2018 Based on responses in the survey, ● 87% of parents feel that the school helps to keep their child on track for college, career, and success in life after high school. ● 89% of parents feel the school communicates to them and their child what is needed to do to prepare their child for college, career and success in life after school. ● Quality Review 2017 Report states that “phone calls are made to families of students who have patterns of absences” The following needs connected to the Capacity Framework - Strong Family and Community Ties, were identified, ● 69% of parents have been invited to an event at the school (workshop, program, performance, etc.) ● 68% of teachers feel that the school communicates effectively with parents regarding students’ behavior. Priority Need According to the Capacity Framework – Strong Family and Community Ties, from our Learning Environment Survey and Quality Review, the school needs to increase the attendance of parents at monthly activities etc. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. 2018-19 CEP 54  By June 2019, parent attendance at monthly activities will increase by 5% as compared to Parent involvement attendance rates from 2017 - 2018 to result in 5% increase in reading and math performance levels. 2018-19 CEP 55  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Action/Strategies/Activities ● Parent coordinator will survey parents around topics of interest and best ways of communicating ● School will utilize School Messenger to contact parents Parent Coordinator, Teacher, Administration Parents, Teachers Sept 2018 ● Website will be updated to have current information and school events. Jan 2019 ● Monthly newsletters by classroom teachers to keep parents abreast of curriculum Planning session with SLT and Parent Coordinator to ensure workshops are targeting the needs of parents. Professional Development Parents, Teachers ● During Tuesday afternoons, staff will plan and present parent workshops and other activities to help parents better prepare to support their children. Staff will prepare newsletters and communicate with parents via phone email or one on one conferences March 2019 Tuesdays Bi-weekly Parent Coordinator, Teacher, Admin Addressing Student Needs Parents, Teachers Tuesdays, Parent Coordinator, Teacher, Admin ● Progress reports detailing students areas of need will be sent home. Parents of students at risk for meeting grade level standards will be invited to discuss with Care team interventions and strategies Parent Engagement Parent Coordinator will work with Family Worker to contact parents to update blue cards and contact information Parents, Teachers Quarterly Sept Jan May Parent Coordinator, Teacher, Admin 2018-19 CEP 56  3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. Parent Coordinator will work with Family Worker to contact parents to update blue cards and contact information Sept, Jan, May Parent Coordinator, Teacher, Admin Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. CCLS aligned materials for parents Parent Coordinator School Messenger School Website Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, there should be a 2% increase of parent attendance at monthly activities as compared to February 2018 attendance. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Parents active engagement in school wide activities such as planning workshop Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 57  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) English Language Arts (ELA) Students who are performing in level 1 and 2 and at riskof not achieving a level 3 on the NYSELA assessment as per review of report cards, writing samples, Fountas and Pinnelllevels Mathematics Science Students who are performing in the level 1 and 2 and at-risk of not achieving a level 3 on the NYSMath assessment as per review of report cards, writing samples, Fountas& Pinnelllevels Students who are performing in level 1 and Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) small group When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) During the day Small group During the day Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Students from grades 1 are pulled out every day to receive Academic Intervention Services from an Academic Intervention Services provider using Dibels. Onstudents in other grades are receiving small group instruction based on their areas of needs as cited in the data. At-risk students receive additional services from support staff. All students are receiving small group instruction on prerequisite math content. AISscience suppportis provided in class as part of Small group During the day 2018-19 CEP 58 Social Studies At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) differentiated grouping embedded in the reading program AISsocial studies support is provided in class as part of differentiated grouping embedded in the reading program At-risk counseling services for students on a one to one and group basis. 2 as per review of report cards, class assessments Students who are performing in level 1 and 2 as per review of reportcards, class assessments. Students who demonstrate at-risk behaviors as per teacherrecommendations, anecdotalrecords, incident reports, parent concerns, Individualized Education Plan, Care Team referrals, School Implementation Team Referrals Small group During the day Small group, one to one During the day 2018-19 CEP 59  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 11 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. Academic Intervention Services, basic school supplies, counseling services, mandated after school help Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 CEP 60  N/A 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. N/A 2018-19 CEP 61  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. Resumes for staff are carefully scrutinized by the hiring committee. Upon consensus, prospective staff members are invited for an interview. For classroom teachers, they are asked to conduct a demonstration lesson. The committee makes a recommendation to the Principal who makes the final decision whether or not to hire the candidate. New teachers are inducted to a new teacher group where they are mentored by a tenured teacher who has been rated effective to highly effective. Teachers receive a mentor who meets with them weekly to discuss their pedagogical practices and behavior management strategies. Teachers have a specific professional development plan that involves anchor techniques and inter-visitation of best classroom practices. Coaching conversations are provided after modeling of specific areas of need. Professional Development is offered to staff throughout the year from the school as well as the Borough Support Centers. Staff members are given opportunities to attend professional development provided by other agencies in content areas that are aligned with School wide and teacher individual goals. Lead teachers are determined by the administration and are sent to outside professional development and turn-keys to the staff. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). At the beginning of the school year, teachers complete a professional development survey around topics of interest and delivery methods. This data was compiled by the Professional Development team and the priorities for the PD plan were determined in alignment with school goals. Professional Development is structured to reflect 3 major areas: School Improvement, Data Driven PD and Sharing of Best Practices. The schedule is structured to accommodate time for teachers to meet in teams as well as for staff to work on school wide initiatives and concerns. Staff has the flexibility to engage in PD presented in various forms of book study, webinars and off-site. 2018-19 CEP 62  Paraprofessionals are apart of teacher teams during the teacher team cycles of learning. Once a month specific PD is provided for them about building relationships with students and providing supports in times of crisis. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). In January, we begin to have informal conversations with PreK parents around the expectations of Kindergarten and how parents can help with the transition process. Kindergarten curriculum and standards are introduced to parents. Families are provided with home-learning activities. Parent orientation is held in June where parents will meet Kindergarten teachers and discuss curriculum content and provide parents with a list of summer activities and school materials for Kindergarten. 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. Teachers meet with admin at the beginning of the year as part of Measures of Student Learning committee to discuss use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures. Periodically, throughout the year teachers participate in data talks and how to use the data to improve instruction. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and 2018-19 CEP 63  purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 109,990.00 20, 4144.76 0 0 1,098,557.73 x x N/A N/A x Column B Section Reference(s) 5A, 5B, 5C, 5D, 5E 5A, 5B N/A N/A 5A,5B,5C,5D,5E 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2018-19 CEP 64  2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 CEP 65  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. Warren Prep Academy, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Warren Prep Academy will support parents and families of Title I students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students During our monthly Parents As Learning Partners, provide materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; 2018-19 CEP 66  ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; The school’s Parent Involvement Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. In collaboration with the School Leadership Team, the school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent-Teacher Association, as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent-Teacher Association and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability grade-level curriculum and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; 2018-19 CEP 67  ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, Progress Report, Quality Review Report, NYC School Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the ESSA; ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings, with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing school newsletters, calendars or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; School-Parent Compact (SPC) School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 CEP 68  Warren Prep Academy , in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; 2018-19 CEP 69  ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering will all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; 2018-19 CEP 70  II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; 2018-19 CEP 71  ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 2018-19 CEP 72  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 16 School Name Warren Prep Academy Borough Brooklyn School Number 028 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Ms. Judith James Coach N/A ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Esther Dallal Teacher/Subject Area Ms. Salmeron Teacher/Subject Area Ms. Felder Related-Service Provider Ms. S. Ameres Superintendent Ms. R. Amon Assistant Principal N/A Coach N/A School Counselor Mr. Richards Parent Ms. Cienfugos Parent Coordinator Mr. Clint Brown Field Support Center Staff Member N/A Other (Name and Title) N/A C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 0 1 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 132 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] Total number of ELLs 0 0 9 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 6.82% 2018-19 CEP 73  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): N/A If yes, indicate language(s): N/A Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 1 2 3 4 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 5 0 0 0 6 0 0 0 7 0 0 0 8 0 0 0 9 0 0 0 10 0 0 0 11 0 0 0 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? The early literacy assessment tool that is being used to measure student progress is Fountas and Pinnell. It is an invaluable tool for informing our schools instructional plan in that it gives us the precise data of exactly which of the several skills of emerging literacy our students have mastered or have yet to master and therefore gives us our next instructional steps and specific areas to target by student and subgroup formation for targeted intervention. The classroom teachers and the ESL teacher conduct monthly running records to measure student's reading fluency and comprehension to monitor progress in reading level. The ESL teacher records this data as well as subset phonics decoding skills mastered or not mastered into an individual student progress tracking tool to inform her lesson planning and to target individual students needs. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? Students are assessed three times a year, BOY, MOY, and EOY. Principal conducts data talks to identify student needs and progress. Teacher's create a plan of success to address student deficit. 2018-19 CEP 74  3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? The ESL teacher submits A SLO: Student learning Objectives report along with her Goals and Objectives detailing end of year outcomes and the State and local measures by which student progress will be evaluated and the teacher rated according to the Danielson Framework. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? students are identified to receive additional supports through during the day AIS and afterschool programs. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] From the start of the Academic year, the previous year's NYSESLAT, ELA and Math Score data are analyzed and newcomer NYSITEL results are used to determine student needs. The Spanish Lab-R is an important tool in assessing our Spanish Ells native language literacy and can be a good indicator of a students home literacy environment and a possible warning sign for weak academic progress. Beginning of the year Benchmark assessments are also administered to all students, including Ells, and student groups are formed for further tiered intervention for struggling students with special attention to the bottom third. PS 028 recognizes that multiple sources of data need to be examined to assess Ells and their needs for small group services within the RTI framework. Proficiency level and number of years of service are essential in assessing why a student may be struggling on standardized tests. The ESL teacher, working with the classroom teacher first need to assure that presentation of content is comprehensible for our ELLs so that they are being given ample access to the content and multiple ways of demonstrating their understanding of it, including using their own home language. In the Emerging literacy grades, both phonological sub skils, vocabulary acquisition and comprehension strategies must be assessed to more carefully analyse strengths, weaknesses and areas of particular concern. Questions of adaptation and aculturation must also be taken into consideration and home environment and structure are important. Struggling ELLs in the bottom third receive specialized small group and individual support in reading strategies, phonemic awareness and vocabulary or math using RTL timelines to monitor progress and determine subsequent teaching steps and tiered interventions. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. The general trend that we have observed here at P.S. 28K across proficiency levels and grades on the NYSITEL and the NYSESLAT supports what ESL research already tells us: whatever our initial level of intake proficiency, students usually make rapid progress in listening and speaking (BICS), reaching near proficiency in one to three years, while taking much longer (three to five years) to acquire the academic vocabulary and grade level skills in reading comprehension and writing. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? Data is collected 3 times a year. Student data is discussed in teacher team meetings to modify and adjust curriculum and teacher pedagogy to address student needs. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. 2018-19 CEP 75  PS 028K has a small but flexible freestanding ESL program which has been a combination of the push-in and pull-out models depending on the student’s age, level of proficiency and their specific strengths and weaknesses. In the past, for kindergarten, first and second grade newly arrived students, the push-in model has been preferred since it was deemed important for these newcomers to have regular and familiar surroundings as they are learning the rituals and routines being taught by their main classroom teachers. For the intermediate, advanced and older grades increased confidence and autonomy made the pull-out model more effective and less distracting for mainstream students and teacher.This year, because of an increase in newcomer beginners in the lower grades pull out will be necessary. Our ESL classes are generally organized by grade level where possible. They are sometimes heterogeneous by proficiency level if possible, but usually with no more than two contiguous levels or two contiguous grades together. This year, we have managed to maintain homogeneous grouping by grade level for most classes. Kindergarten and 1 st grades are being pulled together with a mix of Intermediate and Advanced Ells whom the ESL teacher has determined would benefit from the mix. 2 nd 4 th and 5 th grades are being pulled out during their ELA or Social studies blocks. Pull-out classes are scheduled so as not to conflict with primary instructional content periods delivered by the grade level teachers in Math, or Science. Conformant to CR Part 154, beginning, Intermediate Ells are pulled during their reading or writing blocks for content support and ESL specific listening and speaking activities. b. TBE program. If applicable. Paste response to questions here: c. DL program. If applicable. Paste response to questions here: 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? Thanks to our small size, we have the flexibility to be able to adjust our ESL schedule to ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes in ENL. Our one ENL teacher has, thus far, been able to provide services to all eligible students. Entering and Emerging students receive 2 units of 360 minutes of instruction in ENL per week, Transitioning and Expanding receive 1 unit at 90 minutes and Commanding or Proficient also receive 90 minutes Integrated ENL or other content area instruction per week as required by CR Part 154. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. PS 028K understands that teaching language through the content area is the best practice for ELLs. Therefore, we provide language instruction through the content areas. The language of instruction is in English, but for our upper house beginners, extensive use of the native languages are used (French, Arabic Spanish and Bengali), along with visuals, to present the key concepts and vocabulary of a unit. PS 28K believes that “Comprehensible Input” is the key to deep language acquisition and employs best ENL teaching practices and instructional strategies to awaken and connect to students’ prior knowledge. The ENL teacher makes ample use of graphic organizers, thinking maps, visual aids, pictures and diagrams, use of advanced organizers and anticipatory guides to prepare vocabulary and content before reading to make texts more comprehensible, explicit teaching of vocabulary items and the presentation of of vocabulary by schemata, multiple modalities to present content and teacher modified texts to make content comprehensible, as well as translation of key input into the student's home languages. The Common Core directive for 50/50 literary and informational texts is being observed as are Common Core Standards for reading and writing. Extensive use of sentence and paragraph frames are used to scaffold student writing. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? 2018-19 CEP 76  This is not applicable since we do not have a bilingual or dual language program. The Spanish Lab-R has been given to assess literacy and writing skills for Spanish Ells and are a good indication of how quickly they will be able to transfer them to English. Most of our students come to us in the early grades before reading and writing skills have been acquired in the native language. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status Differentiation has become the watchword at PS 28K and we are cognizant of its importance in designing instruction. a. PS 028 does not currently have any students with SIFE status. Research tells us, however that SIFE students have wide academic gaps and a high level of adjustment to make to an academic environment and a high level of stress. The first step, then, is to provide them with a warm and nurturing environment where they can feel supported and not threatened. SIFE students should be paired with other students of the same home language to learn classroom routines and during class group and pairwork. Often these students will need independent computer time on some alphabet and phonics program like Star Fall to start to master the alphabet in English and gain phonemic awareness of English sounds. Where there exists some fluency in the home language, Native language supports to present content should be relied upon. Generous use of visuals and diagrams is always prescribed. For the presentation of content, texts may be read aloud with visual support. Unit vocabulary should be given to the student in advance with visuals where possible and then pre-taught in the Unit presentation lessons. Differentiation of product would include labeling pictures or diagram or graphic organizer completion with appropriate vocabulary or concept, matching pictures with vocabulary, simple true or false statements. Where there may already be good oral expression and listening comprehension, content presented orally with visual support may suffice for content input and sentence starters for written or discussion prompts for oral presentations, cloze paragraphs, sentence and paragraph frames to model and scaffold written output. b. Newcomers need many of the same supports. As most of our newcomers come to us in Kindergarten and are learning their first alphabet, assimilation is usually the same as for a native speaker. Undue difficulty with retaining alphabet names and sounds or letter sound correspondence is often an indication of future lagging academic progress. As above, newcomers should be paired, where possible, with a student of the same home language for a feeling of security and comfort and also useful for language acquisition if the student already speaks English. Ell newcomers should also be placed up front, near the teacher to improve visibility and focus on the read aloud or mini-lesson. For differentiation of product, students may have the same assignment, with a little more individual attention and scaffolding from the teacher or aid. Higher grade newcomers are given extensive home language support to present the key concepts and vocabulary, extensive use of visuals and diagrams, word walls with pictures, vocabulary notebooks or cards, Explicit pre teaching of academic vocabulary, anticipatory guides to activate prior knowledge and present key content ideas and vocabulary. Differentiation of production, depending on proficiency levels, might include any of the above type activities or assessments used for SIFE students plus completion of graphic organizers, use of sentence starters and sentence/paragraph frames to model different kinds of academic writing gradually removed and again, c. For our Developing ELLs Scaffolding and differentiation includes repeated close readings of texts (The first read aloud by the teacher to model good reading practice) so students can achieve a real familiarity with the content and vocabulary to teach explicit reading strategies and specific language objectives or to promote and model student discussions. Differentiation of production, depending on proficiency levels, might include any of the above type activities or assessments used for SIFES plus completion of graphic organizers, use of sentence and paragraph frames to model different kinds of academic writing gradually removed and posted discussion prompts to model academic discussions and Posted sentence paterns to model ways to cite evidence from a passage, for example. d. PS 028 has no long term ELLS. Here too, research shows that this is a special population with special needs. as this group of 2018-19 CEP 77  student has often internalized a feeling of incapacity and failure, the first step is to create and environment where the Home language and culture is valorized and used in the instructional plan. Secondly, it must be instilled in these students that ability to learn is not fixed but with help and support can be measurably improved, and that success is possible. This is why teacher scaffolding should provide tasks the student can succeed in. While academic objectives should remain rigorous, explicit, vocabulary, phonics and language input especially academic language patters like the passive voice for scientific procedure, for example, must be done to narrow the gaps for accessing complex texts, which is at the basis of the Common core. For these students also, the patterned close reading of texts is the direction to follow, using all of the above mentioned scaffolds and differentiation. As for SIFE students, choosing texts that are pertinent and relevant to these students lives and backgrounds is key to student engagement, which is the key to student success. e. PS O28 currently has 1 student who has tested proficient and receiving 90 minutes of integrated content support per week. This consists of the ENL teacher pushing in for 30 mins 3 x a week during the social Studies mini-lesson. As this student is already reading and performing at grade level, the Differentiation here lies mostly in the writing assignments. The ENL teacher works with the classroom teacher to provide what ever scaffolding the student may need, more extended explanation, use of further visuals, organizers or diagrams for example, and guides the student where necessary to carry out the classroom teacher's independent work assignment. This may take the form of guiding questions, reminders of previous learning, use of writing checklists or exemplars of what a writing piece should look like. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? In order to provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development we have equipped all classrooms with smartboards, projectors, computer stations and a variety of visuals to increase student engagement. We also have leveled libraries in all classrooms to provide students with reading materials at their independent and instructional levels. Our Science and Social Studies programs come with visuals and strategies to support ELLS including hands on activitities. Guided reading, shared reading, word study and the use of advancing and assessing questions will provide teachers with immediate feedback on student learning so that they can modify their instruction during the lesson. Teachers of ELL-SWD's make ample use of graphic organizers, thinking maps, visual aids, pictures and diagrams, use of advanced organizers and anticipatory guides to prepare vocabulary and content before reading to make texts more comprehensible, explicit teaching of vocabulary items and the presentation of of vocabulary by schemata, multiple modalities to present content and teacher modified texts to make content comprehensible. Teachers incorporate specific language objectives into their content lesson plans. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? Students are mainstreamed into classrooms based on their ability and social interaction with others. ELLS-SWD take part in our after school program to provide them with additional targeted instruction. Our AIS program will also include ELL-SWD during Tier One and Tier Two Interventions. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. Our plan for targeted interventions is to provide struggling students, including ELLS, with extra opportunities for support. Those extra opportunities are provided through our RTI programs that provide Academic Intervention Services in which different teachers work with target student groups in reading and math. At the start of the Academic year previous year's NYSESLAT, ELA and Math Score data are analyzed and newcomer NYSITEL results are used to determine student needs. Beginning of the year Benchmark assessments are also administered to all students and student groups are formed and further tiered intervention is planned for struggling students with special attention to the bottom third. Struggling ELLs in the bottom third receive specialized small group and individual support in reading strategies, phonics, vocabulary or math using RTI timelines to monitor progress and determine subsequent teaching steps and tiered interventions. 2018-19 CEP 78  In general, The English Language Arts Program at PS 28K has set a goal to improve the quality of standards based ELA instruction in all classrooms and to increase student performance in ELA for all students including those with disabilities and English language learners. Ways in which this goal is being accomplished is through the implementation and refining of components of Balanced Literacy, ongoing intervention of specialists to foster lifelong reading strategies for the proficient reader and writer, regular use of Running Records and Item Analysis Reports of ELA and ESL. Formative assessement through using I-Ready materials help create subgroups for targeted interventions (RTI), and constant consultation among teachers and interventionist as to progress made and next steps to follow. In Math also Item Analysis Reports are constantly used to create sub-groups, including ESL students, for intervention based on area of need. Modules of ESL classes are dedicated to preparing students for the kind of questions and the specific language of the math exam as well as practice in computation and word problem solving. For the science exam the ESL teacher follows the same model of the specific linguistic input needed to prepare for these exams. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? We are currently seeking new programs that will meet the needs of our ELL students in literacy and math. This year we are implementing I Ready computer learning program for ELA and Math for all our students including ELLS. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? No programs or services for ELLS currently in place will be discontinued. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. ELLS participate fully in all school programs and are given the same opportunities as all other students in their choice of after school, special events and enrichment programs. Invitations to participate and the required parent consent forms are sent out to all students including Ells in their parents preferred language. Some of the other (not already mentioned) after school and supplemental services which have been offered to ELLs in past years include, dancing, stepping, ballroom dancing, musical instrument training (Recorder, violin, drums), numerous school trips and a wide range of special events and shows given throughout the year. Many of our ELLs and their parents have either performed in or attended our Christmas show organized by our music teacher. We have just launched our weekend academy for 4 hours of additional instruction in Math and ELA open to all students including ELLS. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. In the classroom teacher's all use smartboards which adds visual and auditory input needed by ELLS. Classroom teachers also use visuals and word walls with pictures to assist ELLS with vocabulary. Within the pull-out program the ESL teacher draws on a variety of different resources such as Fundations phonics for emerging literacy and the Santillana Intensive English program for newcomers needing basic everyday vocabulary and letter/sound recognition. The ESL teacher also relies on the A-Z online animated projectable reading program and leveled library for read aloud and mini-lessons on reading strategies, phonics, tier one and two vocabulary as well as for whole language input and acquisition.The ESL teacher uses many different online sources to enhance student's point of entry into subject matter including PBS video resources, Enchanted Learning, Read, think Write, Starfall, Readworks among many others, as support materials. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Native language support is offered in Spanish and French Arabic and Bengali during instruction when needed by the ESL teacher and by several of the classroom teachers in the various grades. We have a small leveled library in these languages (to be gradually enlarged and expanded). We also use A-Z online reading library and RAZ-Kids.com which makes these resources available in Spanish and French. Children can access these at home for listening, reading and comprehension activities 2018-19 CEP 79  14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. All our services and resources are chosen and planned to support and to correspond to our students’ ages and grade levels. ESL students and ESL students with IEP's are by law, placed in a grade level corresponding to their age and not their proficiency level. Teachers use Native language supports to present content and differentiate to allow Ells to have multiple ways to access content and multiple ways to show their understanding of it. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? In the classroom teacher's all use smartboards which adds visual and auditory input needed by ELLS. Classroom teachers also use visualls and word walls with pictures to assist ELLS with vocabulary. Within the pull-out program the ESL teacher draws on a variety of different resources such as Fundations phonics for emerging literacy and the Santillana Intensive English program for newcomers needing basic everyday vocabulary and letter/sound recognition. The ESL teacher also relies on the A-Z online animated projectable reading program and leveled library for read alouds and minilessons on reading strategies, phonics, tier one and two vocabulary as well as for whole language input and acquisition.The ESL teacher uses many different online sources to enhance student's point of entry into subject matter including PBS video resources, Enchanted Learning, Read, think Write, Starfall, Readworks among many others, as support materials. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). All ELL parents are given assistance before the beginning of the school year by a letter of welcome sent out in the parent’s home languages by the ESL teacher describing the program, expectations on the part of students and parents, and contact information if there are problems or questions and a list of outreach services, like language lessons for parents. All school communications, including Report Cards are sent out in the parents home language. The ESL teacher ensures that new Ells who enroll during the academic year are appropriately welcomed and introduced into their new classrooms and special attention is given to introduce them to the other students and to classroom rules and routines. Where possible, newcomers are paired with another child who can speak his/her language and facilitate his/her integration. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? Language electives are not normally offered in elementary school. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? Paste response to question here: Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? PS 028 is cognizant of the fact that all teachers are teacher's of Ells and must include ENL teaching strategies and best practices in their presentation of content which can often be useful even for struggling native speakers. The professional development plan for our ELL personnel is to encourage and enable our ESL staff to take advantage of all professional development possibilities offered by The Office of English Language Learners. Our ELL teacher attends PD and turn key to the staff during the Professional Development Mondays. In addition, all teachers attend ELL PD. 2018-19 CEP 80  7.5 hours of Ell training for all staff (including non Ell teachers) as per Jose P will be provided by the ESL teacher. He will conduct 5 workshops that will equate to 7.5 hours so that all teachers can learn strategies to engage ELLs within the classroom. We will not solely rely on the ESL teacher to improve the achievement of ELLs. We will explore additional professional development options as well as the Department of Education releases of their city-wide professional development offerings to satisfy the new 15% ENL or co-teaching related professional development requirement. The ESL teacher is currently enrolled in a four day institute on Planning Lessons to Engage and Support English Language Learners. This workshop specifically addresses, among other points, the writing of both content and language objectives based on the Common core Standards. !5 minutes every Monday at teacher team meetings, The ESL teacher shares ESL insights and best practices ESL learning and teaching strategies and activities with the classroom teachers. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. Our Guidance Counselor works in close coordination with the ESL teacher to provide information and support for the transition of our ELL students from P.S. 28K to the Middle School of their choosing. Parents will participate in one to one conversations with the principal as well as the guidance counselor to discuss middle school options and to make the transition as seamless as possible. He is currently enrolled in a four day institute on Planning Lessons to Engage and Support English Language Learners. As mentioned above, 15 minutes, every Monday, during the teacher team meetings are dedicated to sharing ESL best practices and strategies with the classroom teachers. For classroom common branch teacher's of ELLS, (15%) of the required professional development hours for all teachers prescribed by CR Part 80 is being dedicated to language acquisition, including a focus on best practices for co-teaching strategies and integrating language and content instruction for English language learners. All teachers are responsible for keeping the agendas and sign in sheets for all PDs attended in their own personal PD binder and the ESL teacher in his ESL Compliance Documents Binder available for inspection at any time. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? The ESL teacher contacts all ELL parents in January to schedule mid-year progress report meetings to discuss student progress and suggest ways they can help their child to improve.The invitations are sent out in the parents preferred language and over the new phone interpretation service on the speaker phone will be used. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Many of the families we serve hold full-time jobs which limit their availability. Most parents participate in school-wide activities. They are supportive when it comes to their child’s education. Throughout the year PS 028 hosts various events to reachout to the community and foster parent interest and involvement. the ESL teacher contacts ELL parents to enlist their participation in such events. Some examples of such events include The Beginning of the Year Bash held in our schoolyard and featuring barbeque, games, paint your rock, make your own jewelry and make up for the kids. Free books for the kids were distributed and a great time was had by parents and kids alike. In October, our Character Day Celebration held on a Friday evening was well attended by parents who came to see their kids perform. Many ELLs and their parents participated in our Christmas Show organized by our music teacher. Parents are regularly invited to meet the teachers or sit in on classes. 2018-19 CEP 81  Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Paste response here: 2018-19 CEP 82 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Judith James, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 CEP 83  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: Warren Prep Academy School DBN: 16K028 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Judith James Clint Brown Esther Dallal Title Principal Assistant Principal Parent Coordinator ENL/Bilingual Teacher Narcisa Cienfugos Parent Claricia Felder Teacher/Subject Area Yrma Salmeron Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach Reginald Richards School Counselor Rahesha Amon N/A N/A N/A N/A Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 2018-19 CEP 84  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 16K028 School Name: Warren Prep Academy Superintendent: RaheshaAmon The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No (*Primary) Esther Dallal ENL Teacher Yes Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. In assessing our school's written translation and oral interpretation we meet with parents for an orientation session at the beginning of the school year. The ESL teacher uses the HILS form at the beginning of the year to get a first glimpse of our translation needs to ensure that all parents are provided with appropriate and timely information in a language they can understand. In addition, all parents of new admits fill out a language preference form. All subsequent school communications to parents are sent out using their preferred home language. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. 2018-19 CEP 85  Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral 3 5 1 0 2.01 3.36 0.67 0 3 5 1 1 2.01 3.36 .67 0.67 Arabic Spanish Bangladesh French 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. None Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to Families How do you plan to translate? Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. School documents typically disseminated every year and dates include: 1. Monthly event calenders. 2. Newsletters. 3.Parent-Teacher conference announcements. 4. Student curriculum. 5. After school program information. Sep through June 6.State Testing dates. 7.Ongoing letters,announcements, invitations of various kinds. . The ENL teacher sends out the following mandated parent communications in In house translation from staff and DOE translation unit 2018-19 CEP 86  September within the mandated time frame: 1.Beginning of the year Welcome letter with ENL course overview and expectations with Contact number and email. 2. Continuation of services letter with latest NYSESLAT scores and student proficiency levels. 3. Notification of Proficiency letter outlining transition plan and 90 minutes of continued integrated content support for the following two years. 4.Notification of ELL status with NYSITELL results and proficiency level along with invitation to Parent Orientation Meeting. 5. Parent orientation questionaire along with OELL Parent Brochures. 6.Information on Raz-Kids online leveled reading program and student log in. The ENL teacher sends out the following communications on an ongoing basis: 1. Weekly Behavior and Diligence Report. 2. Unit plan and key vocabulary students are being held responsible for. 3.Positive and Negative Behavior Reports. 4.In January the ENL teacher sends out an appointment request to set up meetings with Parents to discuss student progress and next steps. 5. In April the ENL teacher sends out a NYSESLAT exam calendar to advise parents on tips for test readiness. 6. In June the ENL teacher sends out suggestions for summer reading ,ELA and Math. September 2018-19 CEP 87  n/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide 1. Parent teacher conferences : Sept, Nov, March, May Family Nights Back to School Bash Family Field Day Oct, Dec, Feb Sep June interpretation service(s)? In house translators from staff members. Consultant: The Big Word Staff members staff members staff members 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. school Messenger translated version, translated flyers, Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Share with staff at initial staff meeting and periodically through out the year 2018-19 CEP 88  Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) All of the above notification requirements are in place. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? Parent surveys relating to school communications, including ENL language needs, are completed at the last Parent-Teacher Conference and timely steps are taken to address any issues revealed in the survey. 2018-19 CEP 89 
