2018-19 COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (CEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 15K029 School Name: P.S. 029 JOHN M. HARRIGAN Principal: REBECCA FAGIN 2018-19 CEP 1  Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 CEP 2  School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information School Number (DBN): 15K029 PS 29 331500010029 PreK to 5th 425 Henry Street Brooklyn, NY 11201 718-330-9277 Phone Number: 718-596-1887 Fax: Rebecca Fagin rfagin@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Rebecca Fagin Email Address: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Geographical District: 15 Superintendent’s Office Address: Elisabeth Stephens Olivia Poor Halee Hochman& Karin Pavese N/A N/A N/ District Information Anita Skop Superintendent: 131 Livingston Street ASkop@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718-935-4317 Phone Number: 718-935-4356 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) Brooklyn North Bernadette Fitzgerald FSC: Executive Director: 2018-19 CEP 3  131 Livingston Street, Room 501 Brooklyn, NY 11201 Executive Director’s Office Address: BFitzge2@schools.nyc.gov . Executive Director’s Email Address: 718-225-5199 Phone Number: 718-935-4314 Fax: 2018-19 CEP 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Rebecca Fagin Emma Fitzpatrick Olivia Poor Sara Thorne Kim Van Duzer Monica Salazar-Austin Karin Pavese Liz Dank *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable/ Member/Teacher Member/Teacher Member/Teacher Member/Parent/Co-Chair Member/Parent 2018-19 CEP 5  Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Amy Leffert Mike Errico Hillary Fernandez Halee Hochman Member/Parent Member/Parent Member/Parent Member/Assistant Principal/Co-Chair Member/ Member/ Member/ 2018-19 CEP 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with 2018-19 CEP 7  the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement 2018-19 CEP 8  Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Section 4: CEP Overview PS 29 Vision At PS 29, our multicultural community thrives in a highly collaborative and supportive environment that embodies a commitment to continuous learning and innovative practice. Fueled by powerful connections among our children, families, and staff, P.S. 29 cultivates intellectual curiosity and develops student voice and diverse perspectives, 2018-19 CEP 9  motivating children to take risks, respectfully challenge each other’s thinking, and discover their own unique ability to make positive change in the world. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. We take tremendous pride in our partnerships with a broad range of organizations that serve the purpose of satisfying the diverse needs of our school. For example, we have a longstanding partnership with Teachers College Reading Writing Project (TCRWP) through which we support our teachers with literacy instruction in the form of in-house staff development and outside workshops that align with our student-centered, inquiry-based approach. Consistent with our school-wide goal around collaborative teaching practices such as inter-visitation and lesson study, our in-house staff development will continue to provide opportunities for grade-specific and cross-grade inquiry. By mixing grades and collaborating vertically in 2017-2018, we strengthened our professional community and increased our teachers’ knowledge and understanding of the trajectory of instruction and progression from one grade to the next. This is something we hope to build upon in 2018-2019. Further, as our school grows in size and new professional teams emerge, we have found the need to begin 2018-2019 with a review of our foundational systems and protocols - and use our TCRWP staff to support us with norming our assessment protocols around running records in reading as well as use of rubrics to assess writing. Likewise, we will be spending some targeted professional learning time on guided reading methodology and structures in response to a deeper look at our reading level data over several years from which we identified not only students who are struggling to meet the reading standard for the specific grade but also those who might have experienced lack of growth from year to year. We are moving into our second year with an on-staff Math Coach who has done tremendous work with our teachers on sharpening content knowledge with a deeper understanding of the progression of math skills across the grades. We accomplished the goal of developing universal math assessments that were administered at the end of 2017-2018 and we will begin our school year in 2018-2019 analyzing the end of year data to inform our instructional planning and professional development focus in math for this year. Last year, our collaboration with GoldMansour and Rutherford primarily supported our ICT partnerships within our school with strengthening the alignment between our goals and objectives for students with specific co-teaching models. This alignment helped us to target our students’ diverse needs and support our work with leveraging the resources from within (i.e., the multiple teachers in the classroom). Our goal for the 2018-2019 school year is to extend this work and broaden our collaborative teaching community by joining grade cohorts with other schools with the purpose of developing and practicing these skills. As such, our nine ICT partnerships will collaborate with other ICT teams across the city - we will host other schools and our teachers will have the opportunity to visit other classrooms outside of PS 29. This past school year, we also collaborated with NYU's ASD Nest Support Project that supported our teachers with looking at our work through a neurodiverse lens. We focused on executive functioning strategies for all learners in our classrooms. This year in 2018-2019, we continue to look for ways to support our diverse learners - we will be hosting a talk on raising our students with resilience facilitated by the Girls Leadership Organization. We'll also be hosting Quiet Power with the purpose of developing strategies to engage our quieter student leaders and challenging ourselves to listen to the voices that might not be the loudest in the classroom. As a school that prides itself on our work with wellness, we’re also thinking more deeply about movement breaks and mindfulness strategies in relationship with supporting our diverse students with diverse needs. We continued a collaboration with Bent on Learning in our Pre-K and Kindergarten classrooms last school year in which our students learned breathing and stretching exercises ultimately used as stress and anxiety-reducing, lifelong skills. This work has also built upon our previous work with Move to Improve, a program that trained 90% of our teachers on implementing movement breaks throughout the day. This past year, the director of Bent on Learning also did some 2018-19 CEP 10  professional development work with our teachers, equipping them with some basic skills to apply in their classrooms across our school. Our hope this year is to build on this foundation of mindfulness practices and create a cohort of staff members representing all grades from Pre-K to 5th grade who will meet monthly with the support of a PS 29 parent who is a yoga teacher/leader in our local community. Together, they will develop a set of practices that we will adopt as school-wide by the end of 2018-2019. For instance, we might incorporate a "mindful minute" every day as we start the day and/or after lunch/recess in the classrooms. We are continuing to work with Wellness in the Schools (WITS) who brings cooking labs and awareness of healthy eating habits and practices. This wellness work is complemented by the every day focus that our school community has on our school garden. For instance, we harvest the basil in our garden and make pesto in the cooking labs that are then served in our cafeteria. In 2018-2019, our goal is to incorporate teaching and learning in the garden across our school. Currently, it is the "outside classroom" for our lower grade science curriculum. We hope for our upper grade students to engage with the garden to enhance their understanding of life cycles, for example, or scientific investigation. Further, it is our hope that all classroom and specialty teachers can find ways to bring their own curriculum to life by weaving the garden into lessons and curriculum. In addition to the many ways of weaving our garden into the curriculum across our school, another goal in 2018-2019 is to increase the opportunities for STE(A)M education. Our math coach and media literacy teacher have scheduled collaboration periods with our science teachers and beyond to think deeply about incorporating STE(A)M into the work that we're already doing in our classrooms. In 2017-2018, our media literacy teacher used our library as a hybrid for taking out books and engaging students in challenge-based learning tasks that incorporate math, art, engineering and so on. This year in 2018-2019, we have carved out professional development time facilitated by our STEAM team (e.g., math coach, media literacy teacher and science teachers) to introduce strategies and skills for incorporating STEAM in the classroom. Our science teachers have periods in their schedule allotted to collaborating with classroom teachers and students on different grades to incorporate the garden and STEAM in the curriculum. A big school goal of ours this year is to sharpen our social emotional learning curriculum and explicitly embed our diversity initiatives in this work. While we emphasize student voice and agency, we also recognize that there are defining values that we want for our PS 29 graduates to have internalized that are foundational to voice and agency. As a staff, we identified these big ideas as our "Code for Living," and we will be launching this initiative at the start of 2018-2019. As we spent time unpacking these ideas over this summer, we realized the importance of developing and strengthening restorative practices with respect to reinforcement of positive behaviors. Likewise, In the spring of 2018, we interviewed and selected 3rd graders to be our 4th grade Peer Mediators in 2018-2019. Our goal this year is to leverage our returning 5th grade mediators' experience as they will have the opportunity to be "student coaches” for our new 4th grade mediators. Morningside Center had traditionally supported our 4R’s work (i.e., social emotional learning curriculum) by providing in-classroom support of teachers, curriculum planning with teachers, and specific new teacher training. Over the past year, we have aligned our 4R's program with Social Thinking in our lower grades. This year, we hope to align 4R's with "Net'iquette" (i.e., online etiquette). We continue to build off what we began over the last couple of years in the area of diversity work. Last year, we worked with Raising Race Conscious Children teaching our staff and families explicit skills for talking about race in the classroom and at home. Next school year, we'd like to hav e some refresher workshops to review those skills with staff and families, as well as continue our work with Border Crossers that facilitated the reframing of curriculum towards a diversity-oriented lens, moving from 4th grade in 2017-2018 to 5th grade in 2018-2019. As a school that has received acclamation for the work we've done to support our transgender students, we recognize that we need to continue to train our staff on gender inclusivity to ensure that our practices foster an environment in which all children are respected and can be thrive and be successful. Our school’s collaborations with Brooklyn Academy of Music (BAM), Brooklyn Conservatory of Music, Let’s Play Chess, Dancing Classrooms, Bent on Learning, Construction Kids, Salvadori Center have deepened our students’ experience with a broad range of disciplines including the arts – dance, drumming, band, chorus, drama – and science, 2018-19 CEP 11  technology, engineering, and math. This year, among our many goals, we hope to incorporate more STEM opportunities in our media literacy program and throughout all classrooms at PS 29. Our full time music and drama teachers collaborated for the first time last school year and produced a musical production. Our goal is to continue to build off this work in 2018-2019. We see our musical production as an opportunity for our students to apply the life skills (e.g., collaboration, risk taking, voice, perspective) that our comprehensive curriculum teaches from the earliest grades. Our students also learn about the many roles on stage and behind the scenes that goes into making an ensemble. As our school community (i.e., students and families) grows in size (i.e., an increase of 44% in 5 years), one of our challenges is to maintain coherence, clarity, and alignment among the vision of PS 29, our school-wide goals, and the work of our many programs, committees, and initiatives. Our SLT has thus been revisiting (and refining) the vision and mission of our school to ensure that we are meeting the needs of our ever-growing and ever-changing community – and then putting a plan in place (i.e., one of our former CEP goals) to ensure that our SLT Committees (i.e., Education Action, Technology, Wellness, etc.) are supporting the school-wide goals. As parent involvement increases with the increase in number of students, we have found that the emphasis on student-driven initiatives is critically important. Thus, among the tasks of our SLT has been to help to identify student-led components for each of the events that takes place at PS 29 (e.g., the book fair includes student writing; the holiday fundraiser includes a contest of student-made pies; the coat drive includes student-made fact cards about homelessness in NYC, etc.) Over the past few years, we have worked to systematically thread student voice and agency - in addition to diversity and service into the community events that we have throughout the school year. In 2018-2019, we hope to truly oversee and enforce the alignment between values and the events and programs at 29. As we move into the 2018-2019 school year, we continue to emphasize our core values: student voice, agency, diversity, and service - through the “29 Post,” our student newspaper, our school-wide recycling program, enrichment cycles, "brown bag lunches" (i.e., enrichment opportunities during lunch - e.g., veterinarian discuss his career) and beyond. Specifically, this year one of our CEP goals is to continue to refine the implementation of service projects on each grade from Pre-K through 5th grade. Hoping that our 5th grade graduates will leave PS 29 with life long skills toward service we worked backwards thinking about what projects our 5th grade students can do in classrooms throughout the building. Our hope this year is to strengthen the relationships between our students who are doing the service work and those who are "hosting" our students. We will be measuring our impact on ourselves and others by administering reflections and surveys throughout the experience. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. We continue to implement Fundations, a multi-sensory phonics program in K, 1st and 2nd grade classrooms. Further, we accomplished a big goal last school year of training about 15 staff members with 30 hours of Orton Gillingham methods. OG is the framework that Fundations, Wilson and other phonics-based and phonological awareness-based programs use. We are seeing more and more students on the dyslexia spectrum and want to be able to support all of our students with reading disabilities or struggles. We continue to study the impact that early, explicit phonics training has on our students - and are specifically focusing this year on 3rd and 4th grade word study programs as we've seen that there tends to be a dip once students are no longer engaged in an explicit program such as Fundations. We have also been focused on looking at our school through a neurodiverse lens and have forged relationships with outside organizations to support all of our students with executive functioning among other life skills. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. As indicated in our most recent Quality Review on November 17, 2014, our school received a rating of "Well Developed" on each of the five rated indicators. Specifically, using the School Quality Criteria, our school received a "Well Developed" and "Celebration" in the area of rigorous instruction (i.e., 1.1). While we also received a "Well 2018-19 CEP 12  Developed" rating for the remaining school quality criteria, 1.2, 2.2, 3.4, and 4.2, the report determined 1.2 as a "Focus." As indicated in the most recent Principal Performance Review for the 2017-2018 , the principal received “Well Developed” on each of the ten Quality Review indicators: Curriculum, Pedagogy, Resource Allocation, Learning Environment, Assessment, Goals Setting, High Expectations, Teacher Feedback, Teacher Teams, and Monitoring and Revising, and specifically QR Indicators 1.1 (Curriculum), 1.4 (Learning Environment), and 4.2 (Teacher Teams) were identified as "strength areas." QR Indicator 4.1 (Teacher Feedback) was identified as an "Area for Improvement." Our CEP goal aligned with Effective Leadership tasks our administrative team to engage in deeper formative feedback to teachers through "walk-throughs," inter-visitation with colleagues including Lesson Study, and something new this year called "Instructional Rounds." While we take tremendous pride in our ELA and Math State exam accountability measures, we are most proud of the every day assessment (formative and summative) that captures authentic in-the-moment data to inform our practices. This year we will be diving more deeply in our reading data as measured by TCRWP running records and conferences and focusing on guided reading practices, for instance, by using running records to inform targeted small group instruction. We will have a Literacy Leader on each grade team that will provide some teacher leadership, mentoring and support while systematizing and universalizing these practices school-wide as we will be meeting every six weeks. Likewise, we will have a Math Leader team comprised of teachers on every grade who will help to anchor our work this year, e.g., using the end of year assessments developed and administered for the first time at the end of the 2017-2018 school year (and analyzed and discussed at the beginning of 2018-2019 to inform our instruction and professional development models - labsites with our math coach, focus for Lesson Study and so on. 2018-19 CEP 13  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 15K029 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration PK,0K,01,02,03,04,05 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 927 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 4 2 34 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 22 18 24 11 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 11.0% % Attendance Rate % Reduced Lunch 9.7% % Students with Disabilities 3.5% Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.2% 11.2% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 73.5% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 6.1 0% 11% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 74.2% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 96% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A NO NO NO NO Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A NO NO NO NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A YES N/A N/A High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 85 78 24 96.5% 1.2% 10.8% 3.2% 4.0% 8.1% 4 4% 6.4 81.2% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No N/A N/A N/A N/A NO N/A N/A N/A N/A NO N/A N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 CEP 14  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. At PS 29, we have been working toward making our math instruction more rigorous for the past several years. In reviewing our 2016-17 School Quality Snapshot (as we are still awaiting the 2017-18 report), we noted that we received a rating of “good” (3 out of 4) for helping students improve on their State math tests, both in the “all students at this school” and the “school’s lowest performing students” subgroups. In terms of closing the achievement gap, we also received a rating of “good” (3 out of 4) on helping students with special needs improve on their State math tests. Seventy-seven percent of our students met State standards on the state math test, which was in line with the results of our comparison group (79%). We believe that our students’ math test scores reflect that our math instruction offers a high level of rigor; anecdotally, teachers and students often report that the State test questions are less challenging than those that students encounter in our math curriculum, Engage NY, on a daily basis. We are moving into our second year with an on-staff Math Coach who has done tremendous work with our teachers on sharpening content knowledge with a deeper understanding of the progression of math skills across the grades. We accomplished the goal of developing universal math assessments that were administered at the end of 2017-2018 and we have begun our school year in 2018-2019 analyzing the end of year data to inform our instructional planning and professional development focus in math for this year. One key element to rigorous instruction in mathematics is teacher content knowledge. Our teachers have been deepening their understanding of the learning progressions laid out in the Common Core State Standards (and New York’s Next Generation Learning Standards) over the past several years, since the new standards were adopted. Our curriculum is extremely aligned to these progressions, and the tools, models and strategies that it suggests have helped teachers to understand the CCSS more deeply. Our in-house math coach, a position that was added to our staff two years ago, has worked closely with teachers to enhance their understanding of content, both for their own grades and in terms of what comes before and after on the CCSS progressions. Last year, our coach worked with classroom teachers on ways to include more meaningful math tools and visuals in math instruction, with the intention of increasing access and adding rigor to our instruction (since understanding and using mathematical representations is a critical element of deep understanding). She also worked with our special education teachers, school psychologist, service providers and paraprofessionals to enhance their understanding of the progressions, with the intention of creating greater access and opportunity for achievement for our students with special needs and students for whom English is a new language. 2018-19 CEP 15  Because we know that State test scores are just one measure of student achievement, in June 2018 we administered our own End-of-Year Assessments, which helped us to collect data on how our students are doing in terms of both fluency and conceptual understanding of pivotal standards in math. Our in-house end of year assessments show that roughly 65% of our students are meeting end-of-year standards overall in Grades 1 and 2, 60% in Grades 3 and 4, and 50% in Grade 5. One explanation for the decline in students meeting end-of-year standards as the grade levels progress is that the demands of the mathematical content become significantly higher as the grades go on; in other words, students need to have a deep conceptual understanding of the way the operations of addition, subtraction, multiplication and division work, a deep understanding of place value, and a deep understanding of types of word problems delineated in the CCSS in order to succeed in applying all of that knowledge to 4th and 5th grade level concepts. Being able to solve problems correctly in the lower grades is not enough; students need to understand the “why” behind their solutions in order to be prepared for future mathematics. Research shows that meaningful mathematical discourse is a critical component of developing students’ deep understanding of mathematical content. In the National Council for Teachers of Mathematics (NCTM)’s Principles to Actions: Ensuring Mathematical Success for All (2014), five of the eight effective mathematical teaching practices they identify are related to facilitating math discussions. These are: establish a mathematical goal, facilitate meaningful mathematical discourse, pose purposeful questions, use and connect mathematical representations, and elicit and use evidence of student thinking. We know that talking about math is a critical way that students make sense of mathematical ideas. We also know that in order to facilitate productive and meaningful math discussions -- in order to know which questions to pose, which pieces of student work to select for discussion, which tools and representations to highlight, which mathematical goal to pursue -- teachers need to understand the content deeply. Further, we continue to study what it means for teachers to move from “effective” to “highly effective” (using the terms of Charlotte Danielson’s framework), as all of our teachers fall into one of those two categories. What we have found is that “highly effective” indicators tend to emphasize student-led or student-focused qualities. In 2018-2019 30% of our teachers were rated "Highly Effective" in their overall Measures of Teacher Practice (MoTP). We would like to continue to support all of our teachers with moving their practice from Effective qualities to those that are Highly Effective. Ultimately, we want our students to internalize the mathematical ideas they’re learning and to be able to transfer these ideas to new mathematical content with independence. We believe that by providing professional development around how to increase student-directed math discussions in our classrooms, we will enhance teacher practice and improve student outcomes simultaneously. By focusing our work this year on increasing the frequency and lifting the level of math discussion in our classrooms, we believe that we will have an impact on deepening student understanding of math content that they will carry forward with them throughout their academic careers. 2018-19 CEP 16  Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, teachers across all grades will deepen student understanding of mathematical ideas by increasing both the number of math discussions that students engage in each week, and the quantity of student-student interactions in classroom math discussions. Teachers will establish mathematical goals for discussions, pose purposeful questions, elicit and use evidence of student thinking, and use and connect representations in math discussions to deepen student understanding. 2018-19 CEP 17  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Develop, administer, and score end of year math assessments to determine key areas of strength and need across the school. K - 5th grade teachers and students June 2018 - September 2018 Math Leaders, Math Coach, administration, teachers Math Leaders, Math Coach, administration September 2018 September 2018 - June 2019 Math Coach, administration, teacher teams Pre-K - 5th grade teachers; specialty teachers, service providers and support staff Classroom teachers Representatives across each grade team convene and discussed vertical mis/alignment in mathematics from one grade to the next, using EOY assessments to inform instruction and professional development content and structures. Math coach facilitates grade-specific and content-specific lab cycles based on the needs and interests of the teams with a focus on establishing mathematical goals, facilitating meaningful mathematics discourse, posing purposeful questions, eliciting student thinking, and using and connecting representations in the teaching and learning. ------------ Math coach engages in “residencies” (cycles of work with each grade centered around a specific curriculum module) to deepen teacher understanding of a particular mathematical domain, and model, co-plan and co-facilitate mathematical discussions. Classroom teachers September 2018 - June 2019 Math Coach, teacher teams Math Leaders and Coach will meet periodically (in September, December, January, March and April) to plan across grades how to support teachers with facilitating math discussion, e.g., using Monday professional development time for lesson studies that Classrooms teachers, service providers, and students Fall 2018 - Ongoing Math Leaders, Math Coach, Administration 2018-19 CEP 18  focus on this work; co-planning during grade meetings and informal meetings. --------- Math Leaders, Coach and administration will conduct two “Learning Walks” and take low-inference notes on what math discussion work is already taking place in classrooms, how we can leverage that work, and what needs are visible. Classroom teachers October 2018, May 2019 Math leaders, coach, administration ----------- Monthly math-focused grade meetings for each grade, led by the math coach, will focus on effective practices for facilitating math discussion with particular emphasis on engaging all learners in discussion (e.g students with IEPs, ENL students, etc.) Classroom teachers Monthly from September 2018-June 2019 Math coach, administration ----- Math coach will conduct professional development for paraprofessionals on mathematical content in the service of paraprofessionals assisting their students with participating in math discussion (one cycle of 4 sessions during Monday professional development time) ---- Administer and score end of year math assessments to assess impact of math discussion-related work. 2018-19 CEP 19  K - 5th grade teachers and students May/June 2018 - September 2018 Math Leaders, Math Coach, administration, teachers Paraprofessionals ?? Math coach 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Math Coach and Math Leaders will periodically present to families (e.g., Math Morning or Math Night) on our curriculum and pedagogy. By February 2019, there will be at least 2 math-focused meetings for families, and by June 2019, there will be at least 4 math-focused meetings for families. There will be a differentiated approach to engaging different families with unique circumstances (e.g., public school choice families who live a distance from the school; families with struggles that impact attendance; families who receive free or reduced lunch; families of students who are English Language Learners). Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. coach salary, school staff development; schedule adjustments: teacher coverage, time for meetings, inter-visitation Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG X PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Evidence of teacher growth in improvement of their ability to plan lessons and deliver instruction that incorporates the practices defined above (establishing a mathematical goal, facilitating meaningful mathematical discourse, posing purposeful questions, using and connecting representations, and eliciting student thinking) as measured by reflections in grade meetings, teacher observations, conference notes, lesson plans and teacher feedback on student work. Likewise, we will analyze grade-wide trends and determine whether increasing the aforementioned teaching practices related to math discussion increases student achievement. A mid-point benchmark will demonstrate that 2018-19 CEP 20  observations and walk-throughs indicate 75% of our teachers incorporating the aforementioned practices in their instruction and 75% student success rate on mid and end-of-unit assessments. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) Anecdotal reflection, qualitative observations, conference notes, end of year grade-specific assessment, standardized Math test scores Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 21  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? At PS 29, we have focused on a number of areas within our school to ensure that all students, regardless of their identity, can thrive and be appreciated. We are always thinking of ways to shift the work to be more student-led as we recognize that students are most invested when they're the co-creators of the learning process. The following include some of the work in this area over the years:  Supporting the transition of several transgender students by preparing our entire community with gender inclusive trainings and shifting school-wide practices to be more gender expansive in orientation. .  Displaying bulletin board about figures in history or contemporary times from diverse backgrounds and fields that our students might not otherwise know as they might be lesser known than those captured in textbooks. Our IDEA (Inclusion, Diversity, Equity for All) Committee will continue to do this in the 2018-2019 school year but will take ideas from our students early in the year so that perhaps each upper grade class contributes to these boards in some way or another - increasing the investment on the part of our students and staff members. (We did have one fourth grade class display their service project for one week in 2017-2018 and noted the value of student-created displays.)  Refining our curriculum to be more diversity oriented. We're asking ourselves whether we are teaching diverse perspectives albeit in history, literature and beyond. Likewise, last year Border Crossers supported our 4th grade team with revising a unit of study on historical fiction to have a more diversity oriented frame. This year, our hope is to do the same with our 5th grade team. Last year, we worked closely with Raising Race Conscious Children to develop explicit skills for facilitating discussion about race with our students (and at home with families). We hope to facilitate workshops in 2018-2019 that review and expand up on those skills.   Our Peer Mediation program will continue as a pillar for the restorative practices that we'd like to continue to build. Over the past couple of years, we have been emphasizing the intersection of diversity (e.g., supporting difficult conversations about race, identity, gender; finding entry points in our curriculum for discussion and student tasks around issues of equity) with our social emotional learning curriculum. Social Thinking is a curriculum that emphasizes the idea that our actions lead to thoughts from others about us. We have incorporated this curriculum into our school, particularly in the lower grades with the adoption of some universal components across all grades. This year, we hope to also merge our upper grade 4R's curriculum with "net-iquette" practices. In 2018-2019, our big shift is the development of a "PS 29 Code for Living," a set of shared values that our community actively works toward teaching and reinforcing for our students: respect, integrity, responsibility and empathy. The idea is that whether students are in their classrooms, the cafeteria, the halls, the auditorium, the school yard, at home or in the community - we are adhering to these values. There will be visuals and common language to discuss and 2018-19 CEP 22  reinforce these ideas across the school. Coupled with the Code for Living will be an adoption of learning stances outlined in "A Mindset for Learning" (Mraz & Hertz): Optimism, Resilience, Flexibility, Persistence, and Empathy. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, all teachers will have increased instructional time around social-emotional learning and revised curriculum to be more inclusive and representative of all of our students' identities as measured by observations, teacher schedules, and student-reported reflections. 2018-19 CEP 23  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Diversity Committee Staff members, Border Crossers, Administration, 5th Grade Teachers Diversity Committee, input from families, staff, and students Administration, Classroom and Specialty Teachers, Service Providers Cohort of 12 staff members comprising of representatives across the school: Administration, Classroom and Specialty Teachers, Service Providers, and Paras. Border Crossers supports our 5th grade team with identifying a focus for our diversity work with a unit of study (mirroring the 4th grade work from 2017-2018). 5th grade teachers Fall 2018 Develop a system for inviting students and classrooms to contribute to the "Did you know?" bulletin board that highlights issues of diversity (equity, justice, etc.); exceptional people of color; current events; facts about people, places, and things that we might not read in textbooks. Staff, students, parents, visitors September 2018 - June 2019 Develop the Code for Living and implement mandatory time (on Wednesdays) for social emotional learning. Whole staff and Students Summer 2018 Workshop on Code for Living: Presentation and time for teams to meet to develop student-friendly definitions of terms; align our SEL curriculum with the Code for Living; and write lessons to teach into this work. Staff and students September 3, 2018 and Ongoing -------- -------- (To be added in additional rows - couldn't figure out how to do this in iPortal...) --------- Professional Development on Restorative Practices aligned with SEL curriculum and Code For Living for Staff, Election Day --------- Development and implementation of race-based affinity group for upper grade self-selected students and one for lower grade 2018-19 CEP 24 that focuses on interactive play for students and discussion for families: November 2018 - April 2019; 1.5 hours per week ------ Our school counselor is integrally connected to the District 15 diversity initiatives through her work on district-wide committees to revise curriculum; convene about restorative practices and incorporate students into the work through a District 15 monthly Youth Equity Congress. -------- Observation (formative and formal/summative) and inter-visitation cycles (Team Leader-led and Grade Team-led) that focus on the Code for Living and evidence (i.e., instruction; visuals/posters; routines, etc.) of its alignment with our SEL curriculum. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Our Parent Coordinator (in partnership with the principal) will hold a series of workshops around various topics to support SEL throughout the school: Workshop for families on Raising Girls with Resilience - 9/20/18; Workshop for families on Raising Boys with Compassion - 10/23/18; Workshops for staff AND families on Supporting Our Nurturing Our Quiet Kids - 10/29/18, providing students with skills and tools to build healthy relationships, talking about race with our children, gender inclusivity, mediation of conflict, and so on. There will be a differentiated approach to engaging different families with unique circumstances (e.g., public school choice families who live a distance from the school; families with struggles that impact attendance; families who receive free or reduced lunch; families of students who are English Language Learners). Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Scheduling professional development blocks during designated PD blocks (e.g., Chancellor's Day, Election Day, etc.) - e.g., Border Crossers; scheduling events for families in our auditorium; monthly committee meetings after school; teachers are provided with "Did you know?" handouts on a bi-weekly basis as talking points during Morning Meeting, etc. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA Title II, Part A SIG X PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other 2018-19 CEP 25  Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Walk-throughs and observations will monitor the frequency that social emotional learning instruction is on teachers' schedules on Wednesdays (and other days). Team meetings will also reflect discussion with teachers about these topics - this includes reflection on professional development that is supporting our teachers with social emotional learning practices. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Survey data and qualitative record of discussions Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 26  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Over the last 5 years, in an effort to achieve our schoolwide goal of creating 21st century learning experiences in all classrooms throughout PS 29, we have made tremendous progress in technology integration and in the use of digital tools by both staff and students. This was achieved through the rolling out of new schoolwide systems and tools, the convening of technology-related staff committees, and through targeted professional development.. As we continue to assess and determine next steps for our school’s technology needs, we recognize that the landscape of digital learning is ever-changing and evolving. With this in mind, we have re-framed our goal this year to incorporate STE(A)M-related experiences for our students, and professional development for our teachers to support this effort. We feel that STE(A)M movement in education provides valuable hands on, real-world, creative, problem-solving opportunities for our students to put their skills in science, technology, engineering, art, & math into practice. In beginning to develop a STE(A)M plan for our school, we have realized that our upper and lower grade science teachers, our media literacy teacher, art teacher, and math coach all have STE(A)M in common. As such, one goal over the next couple of years is to foster deeper collaboration among these key members of our staff “STE(A)M team,” and to enlist their support as we expand STE(A)M learning opportunities to the larger school community. In June of 2018, every grade team had a planning day for 2018-2019 during which we reflected and set goals for the new year. There was consensus by the majority of our staff that our enthusiasm as teachers and the engagement of our students increases during integrated units of study. When disciplines connect and learning opportunities apply across content areas, we see an increase in engagement and student understanding. While our school has accomplished these integrated units more commonly in the literacy area (i.e., Social Studies and Reading/Writing), we hope that our STE(A)M goals this year will help us find new ways in which we could do so in Science, Math, Art and Technology as well. This fall, we are beginning to implement this plan with a 2-session professional development workshop led by our media literacy teacher and math coach. They will be sharing a hands-on STE(A)M activity with teachers, followed by an introduction to STE(A)M pedagogy and explanation of a variety of supplies and materials we have acquired to support STE(A)M learning experiences in all classrooms throughout our school. Our goal for this session is that all teachers will begin to offer more STE(A)M learning activities to their students, and will collaborate on their grade-levels to find authentic opportunities in their existing curriculum to incorporate STE(A)M experiences. 2018-19 CEP 27  Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, classroom and specialty teachers will meet four times to plan for integrating STE(A)M experiences into units of study. Members of the STE(A)M team will collaborate with classroom teachers to drive STE(A)M integration into the existing curriculum, as well as create new opportunities for STE(A)M learning throughout the school day. 2018-19 CEP 28  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Math Coach and Science Teacher collaborate on garden curriculum with a focus on measurement (Science teacher is also supported through Sci-Ed Innovator Fellowship Program) 3rd grade students and teachers September 2018 – Ongoing Science Teacher, Math Coach, 3rd Grade Teachers, Administration Grade and Specialty teachers will teach at least one unit of study with a STE(A)M-oriented shift and/or include STEAM opportunities regularly through Choice Time or Extension Activities. Classroom teachers, specialty teachers Math Coach and Media Literacy Teacher collaborate to conduct professional development workshop(s) with instructional staff to support their understanding of PS 29 Instructional staff STE(A)M incorporation in the classroom to enhance teaching and learning. Meet periodically as a vertical team to share expertise and reflect on the incorporation of STEAM experiences in the classroom. (Potentially, there would be a lesson study during Monday PD time around some of this work or during the Topic-based PD cycle.) 3b – Parent and Family Engagement September 2018 – June 2019 Administration, Classroom and Specialty Teachers Administration, Media Literacy teacher, Math coach, All staff members Monday PD, 11/5/2018; Election Day on 11/6/2018 - Ongoing 1 selected representative across grades September 2018 - ongoing Administration, STE(A)M Leaders How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. The Media Literacy teacher, Math Coach, and Lower Grade Science Teacher (with support from the principal and parent coordinator) will periodically conduct parent workshops on areas such as STE(A)M (e.g., Super Science Saturday, a full day of STE(A)M workshops at our school on March 2, 2019 and a 5th grade science fair on March 1, 2019 (also to be showcased at SSS) as well as the theme in Pre-K - 4th grade classrooms for Families as Learning Partners (e.g., STE(A)M projects and games to be played at home) on that same 3/1/2019 date. Our website will provide a list of games and resources for ways to incorporate STE(A)M at home. There will be a differentiated approach to engaging different families with unique circumstances (e.g., public school choice families who live a distance from the school; families with struggles that impact attendance; families who receive free or reduced 2018-19 CEP 29  lunch; families of students who are English Language Learners) - alternative meeting times; translated letters and interpreters at meetings; personal phone calls. For two six week cycles (4th and 5th graders in the fall and 2nd and 3rd graders in the spring) engage in “cool clusters” (enrichment classes) During this time cross grade groups are created and students are assigned to each group based on their interest. Classroom teachers and family members lead the group. Twice a year we ask families to lead a cool cluster. In addition to other interests we will also put a call out to families for parents who have experience related to STE(A)M and would like to lead a STE(A)M related cool cluster. Our parent coordinator reaches out to all families for volunteers. Information is included in weekly newsletters and meetings are held. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Purchase of STE(A)M supplies (e.g., legorobotics, coding software, recycled materials, card board, etc.); periodic whole-school meetings during designated PD block (e.g., 11/5/2019 and Election Day on 11/6/2019); scheduled monthly S/Team meetings, use of Media Literacy and Maker Space classrooms. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA Title II, Part A SIG X PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, classroom and specialty teachers will meet two times to plan for integrating STE(A)M experiences into units of study. By May 2019, classroom and specialty teachers will meet four times to plan for STE(A)M integration into the existing curriculum, as well as ways to create new opportunities for STE(A)M learning throughout the school day. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Teacher observation reports, lesson study observations and reflections, team minutes Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 30  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Over the past few years as the NYC DOE adopted the Danielson framework for evaluative purposes, the school leaders have been developing and refining the observation cycles and school-wide systems for providing feedback to instructional staff. What we have found is that while we are providing hundreds of reports with comprehensive, Danielson-aligned feedback, it has generally been evaluative in nature. While the purpose for feedback is to support teacher growth and development, when it is only evaluative in nature, it may not truly support teachers with taking risks, growing their practice, and developing new and innovative ways to teach and engage their students. For this reason, we will continue to systematically conduct "weekly walk-throughs," across all grades and content areas, which we began in the fall of 2017. This is a more global and quicker way to also get a pulse on the teaching and learning across and within grades and content areas. These walk-throughs have also served to inform decisions about curriculum and instruction, as well as those that are organizational and operational. As such, we will continue to provide in-the-moment feedback to individual teachers and/or general school-wide feedback particularly when the feedback might benefit a larger group. Likewise, in 2017-2018, the principal received professional development with Learner Centered Initiatives (LCI) through her superintendent district 15 principal conferences each month. Through this series of PD workshops, the principal engaged in developing more meaningful feedback that could more effectively improve teacher practices and align with school priorities. It is the hope of the administration to apply these learnings (shared by the principal with the administrative team) to the formative and summative feedback given to teachers. Likewise, the Teachers College Reading Writing Project (TCRWP) principal conference has focused on providing more meaningful feedback by developing practices by which teachers and staff can reflect on the type of feedback that has been meaningful, effective and well-received. These reflections could inform how we provide feedback for these individuals. Further, in 2018-2019, we are applying the practice of "Instructional Rounds" (i.e., Learning Walk), Richard Elmore's approach to effecting school-wide change. Specifically, we will expand upon the "walk-through" concept and conduct a school-wide walk-through at least once (if not twice) this year with a team of staff members across all grades and content areas. On October 24, 2018, our Math Leaders and Admin team will be conducting the first Instructional Round . The team of Math Leaders represent each grade from Pre-K to 5th grade. We also have other teams - Team Leader and Literacy Leader - who also represent the span of grades, one member from each team. These three teacher/staff leadership teams provide us with a systematic means of distributing leadership. Our Team Leader, Math Leader and Literacy Leader teams meets every six weeks (on dates that have already been established and shared via our school calendar for the entire year) to develop, share and implement school-wide goals. These meetings provide the opportunity to discuss school-wide issues relevant to the team that would be best tackled by a multitude of perspectives (e.g., End of year math assessment data across the school with our Math Leaders; Guided Reading in our Literacy Leaders team meeting; Code for Living and Measures of Student Learning (MoSL) in with our Team Leaders, etc.). Instructional Rounds essentially provides a forum for a team to observe across a school, collecting low-inference notes on what teachers and students do or say. All notes are then consolidated and the team looks for patterns, questions, or take-aways from the collective set of observations. These take-aways would then be shared with our entire staff to identify a problem of practice or something that we ought to think more about to implement shifts. 2018-19 CEP 31  Finally, based on feedback from our staff members (i.e., end of year professional development survey; walkthrough data; MoTP data) , we found that there was a strong desire and value to capitalize on the strengths of one another within PS 29 in addition to relevant outside professional development opportunities to grow our teachers' practice and impact on student learning. In essence, inter-visitation and teacher-to-teacher feedback is integral to distributed leadership. We also found that our staff had a need for professional development that targeted the needs of our students – in addition to the curriculum-based professional development. Over the past couple of years, we've had the gamut of informal, voluntary inter-visitation (i.e., classroom to classroom visits) among staff members as well as more formalized inter-visitation systematically woven into our schedules and professional learning plan - all of which have been received positively. We are leveraging those teachers that selected Option 3 and 4 as part of ADVANCE MoTP, which indicated that they would voluntarily open their door to their colleagues. Likewise, last year we used the lesson study framework in our professional learning community work in our designated Monday block, and this year in 2018-2019, we have scheduled two rounds of Lesson Study during our PLC periods. As such, our teacher teams identify an academic area for which some shifts were necessary to address something tricky or problematic (e.g., using models as tools for understanding fractions; engaging in dialogue about race, etc.) Once the team identifies the content and skill area, the teachers developed the lesson plan with the goal of collectively figuring out how to address "the problem" itself. The next step is to implement the lesson with all team members present to observe the lesson through a particular lens. Team members then reflect, revise and assess the lesson to determine its success and ways to continue this work. This year in 2018-2019, we hope to build upon this work that we began last school year by initiating the learning lab structure throughout our professional development work - during Monday PD blocks, the in-school professional development and after-school professional development. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. In addition to feedback received through Measures of Teacher Practice (MoTP), by June 2019 all teachers will receive at least three other types of formative feedback. Formative feedback will include one more of the following: administrative walk-throughs; Team Leader Instructional Rounds; Peer inter-visitation; and/or Lesson Study. 2018-19 CEP 32  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Conduct weekly walk-throughs as an administrative team with specific areas of focus, e.g., classroom environment, student talk, etc. Provide in-the-moment feedback to individuals and groups of staff. (All teachers will receive feedback at least once per month.) Schedule at least three cycles of Learning Lab structures (e.g., Lesson Study or a similar framework) with teacher teams: grade teams; vertical teams; foci on math, issues of diversity, etc. Schedule at least two Instructional Rounds comprised of our Teacher Leaders. Feedback, findings, or problem of practice will be shared with the entire school. (At least one of these will have a Math Focus - consistent with our CEP goal on rigorous instruction in math.) Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All teachers September, 2018 - ongoing Principal and assistant principals Classroom and 80% of specialty teachers Instructional staff October, 2018 - ongoing Administration, Teacher Leaders, Math Coach October 24, 2018 & May 2019 Administration, Teacher Leaders, Math Coach Weekly Admin meetings (and monthly Teacher Leader meetings) include a review of the walk-through/inter-visitation schedule with discussion of trends and patterns and next steps/feedback. Admin and Teacher Leaders September 2018 - ongoing Administration, Teacher Leaders, Math Coach All agendas, notes, and forms are shared on Google Drive allowing transparency, efficiency, and true collaboration to monitor and support student progress. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. The administration will hold grade-wide or content-specific meetings with families (e.g., Coffee and Conversation) periodically throughout the school year. The agenda for these family meetings will be informed by some of the findings from walk-throughs, labsites and lesson study. We also have other forums for engaging families - Families as 2018-19 CEP 33  Learning Partners (5 times per year); newsletters and updates from the principal and weekly from the parent coordinator. There will be a differentiated approach to engaging different families with unique circumstances (e.g., public school choice families who live a distance from the school; families with struggles that impact attendance; families who receive free or reduced lunch; families of students who are English Language Learners) - alternative meeting times; translated letters and interpreters at meetings; personal phone calls. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Scheduling meetings and staff development; substitute coverage for teachers; make-up preps; walk through schedules Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA Title II, Part A SIG X PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Formative feedback (i.e., admin walk-through, peer inter-visitation, and instructional rounds) and summative feedback (i.e., evaluative Danielson-aligned feedback) will demonstrate that the multiple forms of feedback provided by administration and peers supports and strengthens teachers' practice - as measured by a February 2019 mid-point and again in June 2019. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Surveys, reflective conversations and notes documented in Drive, feedback documentation (i.e., walkthrough forms, peer inter-visitation forms, and Danielson-aligned observation reports) Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 34  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. For the past several years, we have had discussions on our SLT, in various teacher teams, and in our Community Service Committee comprised of staff and families about how to truly weave service into the heart of our school: our curriculum, events, initiatives, and daily school schedule. We've developed an extraordinary Green Team with students across every grade leading the charge on sustainability practices, e.g., recycling; garden, etc. Our school has even received citywide recognition for this work (Golden Apple Award, Golden Shovel Award, etc.) Likewise, we had our peer mediation for three years at our school - 4th and 5th graders help to mediate conflict among their peers and children across all grades. In this way, we've thought about service within our school as a way for our students to take the lead and empower them with being active members of our community that effect positive change. Last year in 2017-2018, we shifted our approach in order to systematically ensure that we embed service into our curriculum in every grade through grade-specific service projects. Our hope was to guide students through a process of acknowledging that there are many forms of inequity in the world and inspire them to feel that they have the power to combat these inequities with knowledge and action. One success for us last year in 2017-2018 was joining the STAR Cohort of 40 schools with the purpose of pooling efforts to respond to disaster anywhere in the U.S. and beyond within a matter of days by providing relief to communities in need of support. After the hurricane in August 2018, we found that like so many other schools, we wanted to help with relief efforts but were confused about how best to invest our resources. By being a part of a larger group of schools, our impact is magnified and the vetting of organizations is done on an even larger scale. We found that what also made this experience so successful was the role that families played in this particular service project. Our 4th graders ran the work of our participation with the STAR Cohort since they study immigration in social studies. After our Service Committee identified the specifics about our collections (i.e., adult clothing, pots and pans), we were able to coordinate these efforts with our Rummage Sale - reinforcing service three fold as our community donated clothing and pots and pans to the Syrian refugees; our 4th grade students sold baked goods and used the proceeds for buying the containers used to collect the clothing. The 4th graders learned about Syrian refugees by research and hearing from an expert. Students then taught the rest of the school by conducting classroom presentations. 4th grade students and families even delivered the 40 boxes of clothing to the shipping container site in Brooklyn. We've shared pictures of the ship and refugees receiving these items in Jordan directly with 5th graders and via our electronic newsletter to families. Informed by our grade-wide reflections from last school year, our hope is to strengthen the service projects and make the experiences even more meaningful and impactful for our students by drawing on connections across content areas and among our families and family events. Our hope is to replicate the work with STAR in 4th grade again - in another region of the world. Likewise, by working with the PTA and SLT sub-committees, we're increasing the number of opportunities to make these connections explicit and strengthen our community ties to one another and more broadly. 2018-19 CEP 35  Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, each grade from Pre-K to 5th grade will complete a service project and be partnered with an outside organization with the purpose of helping students identify an inequity that our local or global community may face. Questionnaires and student reflections will document the impact for our students as well as the organization(s) or community being served. By February, 2019, all grades will have begun or connected with an outside organization and shared the project with families. 2018-19 CEP 36  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Each grade team brainstorms and makes decisions about the specifics of their service projects with the support of the Community Service Committee All instructional staff September 2018 - November 2018 Administration and Key Staff members of Community Service Committee In conjunction with our Service Committee, each grade team will receive support from parent representatives on each grade with with the coordination of outside organizations. Staff members October 2018 - Ongoing Parent volunteers, staff members, PTA & SLT representatives ----- Our 4th grade team will collaborate with Service Learning Project for 12 weeks in February 2019 to develop action learning projects that are classroom-specific based on student interest and research. 4th graders February 2019 for 12 weeks 4th grade teachers; administration; SLT Service Committee SLT in coordination with PTA and SLT sub-committees will identify opportunities to connect service initiatives to existing school-wide events. All staff members; all students; SLT; PTA Executive Board; all families Measure the impact of service on our students: administering surveys, asking for reflections or anecdotals from students. PS 29 community January 2019 - Ongoing 3b – Parent and Family Engagement November 2018 - Ongoing Administration; Classroom Teachers; Service Co-Chairs; SLT Co-Chairs; PTA Executive Board Administration and Teachers If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. 2018-19 CEP 37  STAR Initiative; Cobble Hill Health Center; City Harvest; Project Cicero; Service Learning Project; Emma's Torch; Wellness in the Schools; Grow NYC Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Parent volunteers, community partnerships, scheduling in-school and out-of school events Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA Title II, Part A SIG X PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Each grade will have completed or demonstrate progress towards completing a pre-service reflection and service project that incorporates outside organizations as resources by February, 2019 . By June, 2019, 100% of our grades will have completed these projects and their pre- and post-reflections as well as feedback from the organization or community being served. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Questionnaires and evaluations from teachers and staff Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 38  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) TCRWP reading level; state tests; report cards, rubrics and on-demand writing Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) Guided Reading, e.g., LLI; Orton Gillingham, etc.; Targeted or strategy, small-group, one-to-one Word Study, e.g., Fundations, Words their Way, Wilson; When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) During the school day within the classroom & occasional pull-out. Before school- dependent on money allocation (per session) Vocabulary; Phonemic Awareness; Reading Comprehension; Writer’s Workshop; Reader’s Workshop; Reading Rescue Teacher-developed practice materials; Targeted or strategy, small-group; one-to-one Support/enrichment differentiated pull-out periods; Mathematics Mid and end-of-unit assessments; state tests; report cards Science Supplemental support; Stern Math Modified curriculum; hands-on inquiry and investigations Mid and end-of-unit assessments; lab reports; report cards; 4 th grade science exams Targeted or strategy, small-group; science lab; heterogeneous or homogeneous groups; one-to-one During the school day in differentiated support/enrichment groups; During the school day within the regular daily classroom lesson During the school day; periodically during lunch and/or after school 2018-19 CEP 39  Social Studies Projects; unit assessments; report cards Guided reading; Vocabulary; Targeted or strategy, small-group; one-to-one During the school day within the regular daily classroom lesson Reading comprehension; Writer’s workshop; Reader’s workshop At-risk counseling At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Observations; screenings; parent-teacher meetings Needs-based: one-on-one or small group During the school day: pull-out model 2018-19 CEP 40  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. N/A Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). 1 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 CEP 41  supplies, academic materials, outreach to the family to ensure that their needs are being met, at-risk counseling 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. We did not receive an allocation. 2018-19 CEP 42  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools X Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. We are not Title I but develop a hiring committee, partner with local universities to host professional development and assistant teachers, and attend recruitment fairs across the city. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). We are not Title I but provide an extensive professional learning program for our teachers comprised of topic-based and lesson study approaches in addition to administrative and outside organization-led. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. Not applicable 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). Not applicable 2018-19 CEP 43  Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). Since we are a Pre-K through 5th grade school, our Pre-K team works closely with our other teams across the school to vertically align curriculum and utilize resources such as intervention services across our school. We have a Child Study team comprised of early childhood staff and school based support team members -all whom collaborate. 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. We have a "Cabinet" comprised of Team Leaders across our school from Pre-K to 5th grade. We also have Math and Literacy Leaders who are represented on each grade. These Team, Math, and Literacy Leaders meet every six weeks with a schedule that is shared on the first day of school. During these meetings, our staff members collaborate and make shared decisions about assessment and instructional materials. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools 2018-19 CEP 44 Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Column B Verify with an (X) Section Reference(s) $4,860,883 X 4B in Sections 5A-5E Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local  may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. 2018-19 CEP 45   IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.  Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 CEP 46  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. P.S. 29 in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students P.S.29 will support parents and families of Title I students by: ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; 2018-19 CEP 47  ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g.,ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Elementary and Secondary Act; 2018-19 CEP 48  ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) P.S.29, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum ● using academic learning time efficiently; 2018-19 CEP 49  ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Elementary and Secondary (ESSA) Act; I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; 2018-19 CEP 50  ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; 2018-19 CEP 51  ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 2018-19 CEP 52  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 2018-19 CEP 53  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: The direct instruction supplemental program has multiple parts. Based on data from our TCRWP running records and NYSESLAT scores we believe there is a need for additional focused support with homework, oral language development, vocabulary development and reading development. As a school we did not see significant reading growth and movement in reading levels. More than 50% of our ENL students are still reading below grade level. Students struggled with comprehension and decoding of complex words. Based on 2018 NYSESLAT results students we noticed that while students made movement students who tested in the Emerging and Expanding levels did not move to the next level. Students struggled most with the listening and speaking component. All programs will be offered after school for all of our ENL learners in grades K-5. All instruction will be delivered in English. After school programs will take place from 3:00-4:30 twice a week on Wednesday and Thursdays. There will be no more than 8 students in each group and one teacher will be working with a group at a time. One part of the program will offer support in literacy- reading, writing and words. This part of the program will take place on Thursdays from 3:00-4:30. The goal is for our students in grades 1-5 to help them understand and complete assignments related to literacy development, specifically reading comprehension and vocabulary development. We have found that many of students do not have someone at home who can assist them with their homework or literacy skills. This after school program will be led by our ENL teacher, Nicole Nadeau. Two of our general education or special education teachers with a Common Branches license will assist Ms. Nadeau as she works with the students. Students will engage in Readers' Theater to build comprehension, fluency and oral language. The materials this group will use include: big books for shared reading, Fundations and word wall lists for phonological lessons, leveled reading books for guided reading, dry erase boards and markers for interactive writing and nonfiction articles and texts for close reading and Readers' Theater scripts. The other program will be geared specifically for our Emerging, Entering and Transitioning students. Instruction will be delivered in English. We have found that students that test into these ENL levels (based on the NYSITEL and NYSESLAT) need additional support in oral language and vocabulary development. We have found that they do not have a large number of real world experiences, which provide context, opportunities to build vocabulary and skills that can be applied to their reading and writing. This group will also meet once a week from 3:00-4:30 on Wednesdays. This group will be led by Nicole Nadeau our ENL certified teacher. Two of our general education or special education teacher with a Common Branches license will assist Ms. Nadeau working with the students to support their needs in the literacy and language development. Students will be working on developing their oral language, vocabulary and comprehension skills using real world situations, places and texts. Students will engage in the world around them by visiting different places around the neighborhood. Students will participate in guiding reading groups, shared reading activities to develop phonemic awareness, decoding skills and comprehension skills and specific word study activities that are connected to 2018-19 CEP 54  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Orton Gillingham and Fundations. Students will engage in listening comprehension activities, work with games and materials that develop sight word skills, reading comprehension passages and various writing activities. Materials for this group will include story sequencing cards, big books, guided reading (LLI leveled) sets, sight word bingo, Bob books for phonics instruction, NY Ready Math and ELA books and Finish Line New York ELLs workbooks and CDs and nonfiction reading comprehension sets. The materials used are a combination of supplemental and those used in our classrooms. All groups will begin at the end of November. Students will be invited to one or both groups. The teachers will send home letters informing families about the additional support. Letters will be translated in the families home language to inform them of the program and important information. The group will meet throughout the year for about 20 weeks until the end of May. There will be a total of 40 sessions. The groups will not meet during the weeks of the NYS ELA and Mathematics exams and the week before Winter Break. Instruction for both groups will be delivered in English. Teachers will keep track of lessons by creating weekly lesson plans that will be shared with all involved. Conference notes and feedback on completed work will be provided and kept to monitor student progress. This will also be shared with classroom teachers. Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: We will engage in a wide range of activities to raise parental engagement. We plan our activities based on family surveys, School Leadership Team outreach and surveys and parent conversations. Activities will provide support both academically and socially. Activities will be provided to parents to support them and assist them in gaining a clear understanding of the curriculum, expectations, and ways to support their children at home. All families are invited to attend these programs through various methods. Teachers send home newsletters and are translated for those families who specify that notes and information should be sent home in a language other than English. Our parent coordinator sends home weekly school newletters and the PTA sends home information about upcoming events. In addition phone calls are made to families for additional outreach as well. Activities will take place at least three times throughout 2018-19 CEP 55  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities the school year often at the start of the school day beginning at 8:30. On September 24th there will be a "Meet and Greet" for families to meet and hear from various service providers. This is an opportunity for families to meet and hear from member of the school community. Nicole Nadeau will be presenting the ESL program and support she can provide students and families of ELLs. They will address the services they provide and how to best reach them with questions and concerns. Translators will be arranged by Nicole Nadeau, our fully licensed ESL teacher, and Monica Guiterrez-Kirwan, our Parent Coordinator. Other parental engagement activities will cover topics that will relate to our curriculum, as well as reading, writing, and math strategies. Three to four times during the school year we will host literacy and math mornings. During these times families will be invited to hear from teachers (math and literacy leaders) about specific topics that relate to both literacy and math. These mornings (date- TBD) will take place from 8:30-9:20. They will leave the mornings with a better understanding of specific topics and strategies to support their children at home. Topics and strategies that directly pertain to ELLs will be addressed and focused on during these activities. In addition the activities will provide ELL families way they can work with and support their children at home. Families will be notified of these mornings by our Parent Coordinator, Monica Guiterrez-Kirwan via email and classroom teachers will notify families via hard copies of newsletters. On November 20th Teachers College hosts a workshop for families. It is called Families Make the World of Difference to Kids as Readers and Writers: Families as Partners, Supporting Joyful Literacy. Our parent coordinator will invite families to join her to attend this workshop. A series of workshops will be held in Spanish as well. Our IDEA committee will host two coffee and conversation dates for families with children who have IEPs. Translators will be available at these sessions as well. Flyers will be sent home to all families. Four times during the year on the first Friday of a particular month we host Family Mornings. Families are invited to join their child in his/her classroom from 8:3-9:20 to engage in an activity related to math, reading, writing or social studies. Families are notified by our Parent Coordinator’s newsletter, the PTA email blasts and individual classroom newsletters. Individual meetings will be scheduled to support 5th grade students and families applying to Middle School. The meetings will provide an opportunity for a family member and our guidance counselor, Cara Turnbull, to review the application process and assist in completing the application. When necessary a translator will be present. Translators will be arranged by our parent coordinator or ENL teacher. When possible they will be members of our school community. Parents will be notified in writing and via email about upcoming events and workshops. Letters will be sent home to inform parents of upcoming activities. When possible, letters will be translated in a language other than English. Agendas, flyers and attendance sheets are created and used for all activities. We will keep these records for follow up and future reference. We will send home flyers and post them around the school building. Families will sign in when they attend a workshop. Agendas will be made available and given out at the workshops and/or meetings. In addition to these academic activities our Parent Coordinator starting a Family Cooking Circle. Every other month families are invited to join a group a parents to learn how to cook a dish from a particular culture. This is an opportunity for family members to meet together to socialize and learn a new dish. We have found that this has activity has welcomed families into the school and they feel more comfortable and involved in our school community. The circle is led by the adult leading the cooking the particular demonstration. It takes place in our cafeteria directly after drop off (8:30-9:20). Our Parent Coordinator invites families via her weekly newsletter and coordinates the whole program. 2018-19 CEP 56  Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits) 10,917.00  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. 0 $1,449.00 Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. Per Session for after school program that focuses on literacy, math, oral development and phonics instruction support 0 Bob Books for Phonics Instruction 2 sets x 63.70=127.40 Brand New Readers 2 sets x 67.35= 134.70 Big Books 2 Books x $20.24= 40.48 5 Books x $ 18.74= 93.70 Fountas & Pinnell Leveled Literacy Intervention (LLI) Green System Booster Pack 1 kit x 430.00=430.00 NY Ready Instruction Guides (ELA)- 1 copy for grades 2-5 4 copies x 24.15= 96.60 NY Ready Teacher Resource Guide (ELA) 1 copy for grades 2-5 4 copies x 31.50=126 NY Ready Instruction Guide (Math) 1 copy for grades 1-5 5 copies x 13.65= 68.25 NY Ready Teacher Resource Guides (Math) 1 copy for grades 1-5 5 copies x 31.50=157.50 Nonfiction Reading Comprehension Sets: 1 set (Grades 4-5) x 49.99= 49.99 1 set (Grades 2-3) x 49.99= 49.99 Story Sequencing Cards Set: 2 sets x 39.99= 79.98 2018-19 CEP 57 Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. 0 0 0 12,366 Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL 0 0 0 $12,366 2018-19 CEP 58  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 15 School Name John Harrigan School Borough Brooklyn School Number 029 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Rebecca Fagin Coach Kim Van Duzer (Math) ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Nicole Nadeau Teacher/Subject Area Melissa Golden/ SETSS Teacher/Subject Area Related-Service Provider January Cali Mark Superintendent Anita Skop Assistant Principal Halee Hochman Coach N/A School Counselor Cara Turnbull Parent Parent Coordinator Monican Guterriez-Kirwan Field Support Center Staff Member Bernadette Fitzgerald Other (Name and Title) Dawn Pender/AP C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 1 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 917 2018-19 CEP 59 Total number of ELLs 34 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 3.71%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 1 4 K 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 2 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 3 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 5 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? PS 29 uses a variety of assessments to guide instructional planning for our ELLs. Grades K-5 use the TCRWP running records to assess and monitor literacy skills of all of our students including our ELLs. TCRWP running records assesses decoding skills, fluency and comprehension (literal and inferential) abilities. This information helps us to assess what stage of literacy development our students are in during various times throughout the year. Students are formally assessed three times throughout the year. Analysis of the data collected using the running records allows teachers to determine if and when students can move to higher independent reading levels as well as what they continue to struggle with in terms of reading development. Kindergarten, 1st grade and newly enrolled students are also assessed on Concepts of Print, letter identification (upper and lower case), letter-sound recognition and sight word recognition. Based on the results, classroom teachers then teach the letters and sounds students do not know in a small group or on a one-to-one basis. We use spelling inventories from “Words 2018-19 CEP 60  Their Way” to see where each student is in terms of spelling development. In addition we use Fundations in grades K-2. Assessment is built into this program and the data collected from the assessments is used to inform instruction. Students are assessed on phonics and spelling patterns throughout the year as they complete each unit in the Fundations curriculum. We use this data to group students in word study groups according to their stage of spelling development. All data informs our school’s instructional plan. Additionally we assess writing skills using on-demand writing assessments both pre and post at least one narrative, informational and persuasive writing unit. Students are asked to write about a particular prompt. Teachers assess students understanding of craft, structure and grammar. The information gathered from these on demand writing assessments guides instruction by providing teachers with the strengths and needs of ELL students. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? All teachers are given training through literacy leaders and TCRWP staff developers in conducting the running records and on demands assessments. Training is also provided to teachers to help assess and analyze the results to use the information to guide instruction. At the start of the school year, we will be meeting with K-2 and 3-5 teachers to review protocols for administering and assessing running records. Each grade will analyze completed running records at various levels to norm and ensure consistency for all of our students. Classroom teachers and grade teams meet with our ENL teacher, Nicole Nadeau to share results and develop cohesive instruction that is administered to the students both in and out of the classroom. Teachers use grade meeting and Tuesday afternoons to meet, discuss and plan instruction. Each grade has a grade meeting once a week. Teachers and support staff have the materials for the TCRWP curriculum and access to online tools. Each classroom teacher, ELL teacher and SETSS teacher has a set of K-5 curriculum books in both reading and writing. We also ensure that all teachers have the books and passages for the running records and copies of the assessment are readily available to them. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? PS 29 uses TCRWP running records as our baseline and for benchmark reading assessments. At the start of the school year every child is administered running records to determine their baseline reading level. While we use running records throughout the year, we use MoSL approved TCRWP running records to determine a baseline and final reading level. We also use writing rubrics, end of unit math assessments as part of the Engage NY curriculum. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? Once the summative data has been gathered teachers determine what interventions are necessary to support the progress of our ELL students. Teachers use their grade meetings to discuss as a team what inventions are appropriate and needed. They will also meet with the administration and Child Study team to provide the data they collected and their plan for providing interventions to address the needs of the students. PS 29 has two SETSS teacher as well as an IEP teacher. There is room in their schedules to provide at-risk support and intervention. Students will be assigned to work with these teachers in small group to address the interventions needed. In addition last year we trained the special education teacher in each of the ICT classrooms in K-3 and at least one general education teacher in grades K-3 in Orton Gillingham (OG). Those teachers will create small groups and work one-on-one with students with the OG program. This will provide intervention to those students struggling with phonemic awareness and phonics. Additionally we will provide small group instruction before and after school for students to provide guided reading, literacy support and math support for those students who need additional interventions. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] PS 29 uses the data to guide instruction for ENLs within the Response to Invention (RtI) framework. Our Child Study / LAP team meets regularly ( three times a month) to discuss our ELL students, analyze their data, and discuss interventions to be used by both the classroom and ENL teachers. When appropriate the classroom teacher is part of our Child Study team. The administration works with our ENL teacher to assist her in making her schedule so that it meets the needs of our ENL students, planning appropriate lessons, and discussing issues and concerns related to our ELL population. Based on our data from NYSESLAT, NYS exams, formal assessments, and informal assessments, our intervention plans focus on phonics, vocabulary 2018-19 CEP 61  and language development, reading development, writing development, and content area development. Interventions are put in place to support students who are not meeting grade level expectations. Interventions for reading development include, but are not limited to, developing ideas about character, setting and plot, as well as supporting answers and ideas with evidence from the text. Teachers model this work through shared reading, close reading of texts, interactive read alouds, and guided reading. For students in K-2 who need more phonics instructions, they participate in double dose of Fundations as an additional intervention that goes along with the whole class Fundations program. When appropriate students will work with one of our trained teachers in the Orton Gillngham program. Interventions to support vocabulary development is embedded throughout reading and writing activities. In writing, students are provided sentence starters, graphic organizers, and writing tools to help plan and develop ideas. Instruction is explicit and modeled before students are expected to work independently. Feedback is ongoing between teachers and students. Feedback is used to set goals and assess student progress. As interventions (Tier II) are provided to students, the teacher meets with the Child Study team. During these sessions, the teacher presents what interventions have been used, analysis of student progress and together next steps are established. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. At PS 29 we use a verity of data to evaluate and inform our ELL program. We use the results of the NYSESLAT and state ELA and Math tests. We also use data from TCRWP running records, Engage NY end of unit assessments, Fundations unit assessments and the final rubrics from on-demand writing pieces. When we are looking at the data we look at the overall score (when applicable) and the breakdown of different standards and modalities. When looking at running records we focus on the types of errors students make, their literal comprehension and their inferential comprehension. This data is collected and used to form groups and develop lessons and goals. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? We use grade meetings and Tuesday afternoons to meet in teams to review the data and discuss our goals and plans for the program. Classroom teachers, ENL teachers and SETSS teachers are given the data and are part of the meetings to discuss the findings and make plans for instruction, Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. The instruction for ELLs will be delivered based on CR Part 154.2 requirements. Our fully licensed ENL teacher, Nicole Nadeau will work collaboratively with the classroom teachers of our ELL students. Based on the students' English Proficiency Level, instruction will be delivered as both push in and pull out. Between one to two classes on each grade has ELL students ELL students in a particular grade were grouped together in one or two classes depending on the number of ELL students that we have in that grade or those mandated to be in the ICT class. The groupings in each class are of mixed proficiency levels. With support from administration Ms. Nadeau creates a schedule to service her ELL students based on the number of required push in and pull out The schedule is created in conjunction with the classroom teachers and service providers (when appropriate) to ensure that push in minutes take place during ELA periods and for students who are in the levels of Entering, Emerging and Transitioning. For the majority of our Expanding and Commanding students, push in takes place during ELA and Social Studies periods. Push in instruction will be comprised of students on the same grade but different proficiency levels. Pull out instruction will be comprised of groups of the same proficiency level but across different grades. Additionally attention is paid to the 2018-19 CEP 62  students reading levels to create groups. This ensures that planning and the delivery of instruction will be focused on the needs of the students. During the times when Ms. Nadeau pulls groups of students and works in her own classroom she will provide lessons around vocabulary, phonemic awareness, reading comprehension and conversation skills. This will be in collaboration with the work and units and study that are taken place in the classrooms across grades. The classroom teacher and Ms. Nadeau will meet during a planning time or on Tuesday afternoons to collaborate and plan lessons for when she will be working in the classrooms. b. TBE program. If applicable. N/A c. DL program. If applicable. N/A 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? Following the guidelines of CR-Part 154. 2 we will deliver the required instructional minutes for students in each level. The instructional minutes will be delivered using push in and pull out methods. Our school uses a Balanced Literacy approach to learning, so all students get consistent literacy input, helping them with Language Arts in English. Students who test into an 'entering' or 'emerging' level will receive 360 minutes of ENL each week. 'Entering' students will receive 180 minutes in standalone (push-out) ENL instruction. Students will work with Ms. Nadeau out of their classroom during this time. Groups may be made up of mixed grades. They will also receive 180 minutes of instruction in integrated (push-in) instruction. Ms. Nadeau will push-in to the classroom and support the students in the work they are doing in both ENL and reading and writing. In order to meet the required minutes, some students from another classroom on that grade to push in and work with Ms. Nadeau in a small group. 'Emerging' students will receive 180 minutes of integrated (push-in) instruction similarly to the support 'entering' students will receive in the classroom. 90 minutes will be spent in the ESL classroom where students will receive specific ENL instruction outside of the classroom. The remaining 90 minutes will either be push in or pull out depending on the schedule and needs of the students who are at a level of entering. Students who are tested at a level of 'Transitioning or Expanding' will receive 180 minutes of ENL each week. 'Transitioning' students will have 90 minutes of integrated instruction. If necessary, Ms. Nadeau will pull students into a classroom from other rooms to form small group and support the students in their work with reading, writing and content area. The other 90 minutes will be standalone ENL support to focus on vocabulary skills and reading comprehension. 'Expanding' students will receive all of their ENL instruction in the integrated model. Ms. Nadeau will push into the classrooms and wok collaboratively with the teacher to support students in ENL and reading, writing and content areas skills and strategies. For those students who are proficient, they will receive 90 minutes each week of integrated instruction. Due the nature of the required minutes for ENL we will created unique models and groupings to support the language acquisition and vocabulary development of all of our ELL students. The minutes of instruction will be inputted onto STARS as well. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. At PS 29 classroom teachers deliver all content area instruction, with the exception of Science. All content areas are taught in English. We use a Balanced Literacy approach to learning. We follow Teachers College Reading and Writing Project curriculum for reading and writing. Using the workshop model, we incorporate units of study to align our reading and writing instruction. Every Kindergarten through 2nd grade class is using Fundations to teach phonemic awareness. For spelling and word study, teachers and grades use a variety of programs. Fundations and Words Their Way are two programs classroom teachers use to teach spelling and word study. Teachers are also incorporating aspects of Orton Gillingham into their phonics instruction. For mathematics, classroom teachers are following the modules of Engage NY. Kindergarten primarily uses TERC Investigations curriculum in Kindergarten, however this year they will be incorporating aspects of ENGAGE NY as well. Science is taught out of the classroom. All of these programs and curricula are aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards. Science teachers use FOSS kits and additional supplemental materials. 2018-19 CEP 63  In ENL class, a variety of content areas are addressed. Instruction is divided so that time is spent on various content area language development. Students learn vocabulary and language structures that scaffold what they are doing in their mainstream classrooms. They also learn language acquisition strategies that help them across content areas. Our ENL teacher does shared reading and guided reading with her students to work on and build upon reading strategies taught in the classroom. She specifically has been working on decoding, summarization and inferring strategies. Classroom teachers and the ENL teacher work together to support the needs of our ELL students. Classroom teachers and the ENL teacher use technology to support ELL learning. Teachers are having students listen to books using tape players, Ipads, Chromebooks or personal MP3 players while following along in the book. They are allowing students to use computers to access online dictionaries and translating programs for writing. Students are also using computers and tablets to access math and reading websites in order to support multi-sensory learning. Additionally, teachers use technology to support multi-sensory learning of subject areas as well as, the document camera, or enlarged print document reader, to model language and skills and for shared reading and writing. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? PS 29 works to ensure that when possible and relevant, ELLs are evaluated in their native language. When Spanish speaking ELLs are administered the NYSITELL and then are identified as needing ELL services, we administer the Spanish LAB to assess their level of proficiency in Spanish. Our school aides and paraprofessionals who speak Spanish help us administer the Spanish LAB. For Beginner students, when books are available we encourage them to read in their first language while teaching them to read in English. We also encourage students to write in their first language while developing their writing skills in English. When students read or write in their first language we assess this work when appropriate. The materials and content they are reading and writing about would also reflect current units of study. Our school aides and paraprofessionals who speak the student’s home language help translate and assess student’s in their native language. They work in conjunction with the classroom teachers and ENL teacher. If we were ever to have sufficient numbers to warrant opening a bilingual class, we would have assessments in the first language to assess listening, speaking, reading, and writing levels in the first language. The certified bilingual teacher would administer these assessments. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status a. In the past few years, we have not had any SIFE students, or students with interrupted or inconsistent formal schooling. However, should we have SIFE children in the future, we will provide them with small group intervention during the school day and additional small group or one to one instruction during our per session small group (before or after school) instruction that targets individual learning needs, which is something we hope to have this year. We would also provide them with double ESL periods during ELA time, and in-school intervention, which includes the Wilson program (such as Fundations) and Orton Gillingham for students struggling with English phonemes and LLI for decoding and reading comprehension. b. We try to support the acceleration of language learning in many ways for all ELLs, but especially for our Newcomers (students who have been in US schools less than three years) because NCLB now requires ELA testing for ELLs after one year. Some of the supports we use for our Newcomers are peer “buddies,” or students who speak the child’s first language and/or who will prove to be an aide to the student both emotionally and academically; we will also maintain an ongoing dialogue with the families through use of translators, if needed. Our newcomers will receive additional "at risk" support to aid in the English language acquisition in addition to their 360 mandated ENL minutes. Support is provided by our ENL teacher, SETSS teachers or IEP teacher depending on space in their program. c. Developing ELL students are those students who have been receiving ENL instruction for 4-6 years continuously.In order to target the areas where ELLs need support, we looked at NYSESLAT sub-tests and overall NYS testing data.This school year 2018-19 CEP 64  (2017-2018), we will continue to provide interventions for our 4th, 5th and 6th year ELL students who have not yet met the performance standard in reading and writing.During the both stand alone and intergrated periods the fully certified ENL teacher will have students work in small groups and/or will confer one-on-one with students.The ENL teacher incorporates the units of study for reading and writing as well as integrating the grade's social studies curriculum into her lessons. The following strategies and supports will be used during these sessions to support the development of thinking and writing skills: - Shared writing to model and support the development of writing sentences, paragraphs and essays-Looking at mentor texts of writing with students to identify parts of sentences, paragraphs, essays and overall good writing strategies -Pre-teaching key vocabulary words that are used in essay writing by writing them on charts and then modeling how to use these words to write an essay -Teaching students how to use charts we created to write sentences, paragraphs and essays -Teaching and modeling how to use graphic organizers to help develop ideas for planning and writing through the use of the document camera to enlarge a piece of text. The classroom teachers will collaborate with the ENL teacher in assessing student writing development by looking at “On Demand” pieces and then using this information to create lessons to support their individual writing development. This school year (2017-2018), we will also continue to provide interventions for our 4th, 5th and 6th year ELL students who have not met the performance standard in reading. During ELL push in and pull-out sessions, the ENL teacher will work with small groups and/or confer one-to-one with students. Explicit phonics instruction will be a part of all lessons. The following strategies and supports will be used during these sessions to support the development of reading skills. -Shared reading using the document camera and the computer based program Reading A to Z to model and practice fluency, vocabulary development and reading strategies -Use guided reading and reading skill packets to model reading skills and strategies and to give students who need the extra support of guided and peer practice -One-to-one conferring with students to check in and make sure they are independently using and applying new reading strategies to comprehend and deepen understanding. We are also using supports and interventions in the classroom for our mid-year ELLs.Classroom teachers use a computer based reading program called Raz-Kids and supplement work with Reading A to Z.In order to support reading development classroom teachers have students: -Listen to books on Raz-Kids one level above their independent level to listen and practice fluent reading and the sounds of new words.While listening to the passages, students track the words that are read aloud as they are highlighted in front of them on the screen. -Record themselves reading books aloud after having listened to the book at least once.The student and teacher can listen to the recording for fluency and self-monitoring. -Have students use different kinds of teacher created graphic organizers and materials to hold students accountable as they keep track of information and meaning as they read -Use computer based programs to click on words when the student cannot use one of their reading strategies to figure out how it sounds or what it means -Monitor comprehension through end of book quizzes and by completing their skills worksheets from Raz-Kids and Reading A to Z. d. At this time, PS 29 does not have any ELLs who have completed their sixth year of ESL.We are a Pre-K to 5th grade school.So, if a student had completed their sixth year they would be a hold over.If we had an ELL who had completed their sixth year and was a holdover, we would give them small group instruction and provide them with other interventions, such as Wilson, if they met the requirements. e. Students who are former ELLs (2 after testing Commanding) will continue to be supported in the classroom.Students will receive 90 minutes of push in ENL support in ELA or other content areas.Together the ESL teacher and the classroom teacher work together to support continued language acquisition.Modifications to assignments, availability and use of graphic organizers, and additional small group work in reading and writing will be provided to former ELL students if needed.All of our transitioning ELLs are monitored through our Child Study/LAP team in order to keep track of their process.The team ensures that they receive additional support and interventions if they are not meeting grade level standards.Former ELL students in testing grades (3-5) continue to receive testing modifications (extended time and separate location) provided for them by the 2018-19 CEP 65  city and state for the first two years after reaching the Commanding proficiency level. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? There are many instructional strategies and grade-level materials our fully certified teachers of ELL SWD (Students with Disabilities) use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development. For shared and close reading, teachers use grade level appropriate texts. The levels of the text correspond with the appropriate grade level as based on Fontas and Pinnell leveled reading texts. Teachers engage in focused small group guiding reading 3-4 times a week. Students receive copies of text on their instructional level and the teacher focuses on specific reading strategies and skills. The text is either enlarged using the document camera or students receive their own copy of the text. Teachers use a variety of technology for entry points into content to access and broaden understanding. Our fully certified general education, special education, and ESL teachers use the document camera and Smart Boards to provide enlarged text and visuals to support students with special needs within the context of the curriculum by modeling reading, writing, and math strategies, and for conducting shared reading and writing with students. Our special education students use the computer during reading, writing, and math for a multi-sensory approach to learning. Many of our ELL-SWDs are also using tape players, Ipads, Chrome Books or personal MP3 players in order to immerse themselves in the English language. All of our teachers who work with our ELL-SWDs also use leveled texts to support the varied reading levels of our students and use either guided reading or one-to-one conferring to teach new reading strategies that will help students become stronger readers. We use the reading workshop model, Fundations and Words Their Way for word study at PS 29, but we also have Wilson and OG trained teachers (K-3, SETSS and IEP teachers)who help our struggling readers and writers who need extra support with phonemic awareness. Students are able to use a variety of materials and supports throughout the day to provide access to the academic content. Teachers meet with service providers on a regular basis to discuss, plan, and modify work for our ELL-SWDs. Service providers also provide suggestions and materials for teachers to use with their students. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? PS 29 uses curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to meet the diverse needs or our ELL-SWDs within the least restrictive environment. (8 of our 34 ELLs have IEPs). Students are serviced per their IEPs. The School Based Support Team conducts the evaluation and based on the results of a comprehensive evaluation placement and services are determined. At this time our ELL-SWDs are in ICT classrooms. The ESL teacher works closely with the classroom and/or special education teachers to plan appropriate supports and to use both ENL and Special Education strategies. When appropriate, we are mainstreaming our ELL-SWDs into general education environments. We service these students in the general education environment by providing them with the appropriate accommodations and modifications, such as an alternate language paraprofessional. The ELL teacher services all students with IEPs in small groups with other general education ELLs with the appropriate accommodations. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. All of our intervention programs are offered in English. Our Kindergarten, 1st Grade and 2nd Grade classrooms, which include the majority of our newcomer population, are using the Fundations program to teach direct phonemic awareness instruction during the regular school day. For students who need additional support in phonemic awareness, teachers will teach additional small group lessons called Double Dose. In the spring we trained a group of teachers in grade K-3 in the Orton Gillingham program. Teachers will incorporate the program and aspects of the program when working with individual and small groups of students. ELL students in 1st and 2nd grade who need targeted interventions engage in Literacy Intervention Program (LLI) from Fountas and Pinnell. It is a targeted intervention program that focuses on reading, writing, and spelling development. Students who need targeted intervention for phonemic awareness participate in Fundations work in a small group setting. The lessons also provide strategies for working with ELLs. ELL students in 4th and 5th grade do small group 2018-19 CEP 66  Wilson Intervention work focusing on reading and spelling development. All of our ELLs benefit from a computer-based reading program called “Raz-Kids” and small group Guided Reading intervention led by both the ENL and classroom teachers; teachers also confer with students 1:1. In terms of math support, students benefit from the computer- based math program, “Ah Ha Math” and “Smart Math” as an additional intervention for students. 1st and 2nd grade ELLs use “Key Skills” as another computer-based intervention to support Math learning. All intervention services are offered in English. Additionally students who need "at-risk" intervention support work with our SETSS teachers, IEP teacher and ELL teacher for at least one period a week individually or in a small group setting. Intervention for the content areas of Social Studies and Science is integrated into our reading workshop. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? We are constantly reviewing and improving our programs for all of our students. This year we will be having more students involved in the OG program, especially for those struggling with phonemic awareness and phonics instruction. To support our informational reading and writing units, we have focused on supporting our libraries with a wider variety of reading levels and topics that are interested and relevant to our students. We are also focusing on how our units of study incorporate different points of view and different races and cultures. We have started to focus on our libraries and have been studying if the books in our libraries include different races, cultures and multiple perspectives. For math we follow the Engage curriculum. Grades are embedding more inquiry lessons and centers into the mathematics unit. Our social studies curriculum is constantly being refined and this year we are incorporating more opportunities for inquiry and hands on experience to raise the level of understanding and thinking. We continue to refine our service and community projects across all grades. This year we will continue our after school program for ELL students and their families. The program will take place twice a week (Wednesdays and Thursdays 2:50-4:10) and led by our ENL teacher Nicole Nadeau along with 4 other teachers. Last year this program was a success. Students were placed in small groups and participated in stations that focused on different literacy skills and phonics. The teachers incorporated homework help as well. This year we will begin earlier then we did last year. All ENL students will be invited to the program again this year. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? Not Applicable 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. All of our students, including all of our ELLs, are offered equal access to all school programs. Letters for programs and activities are sent home in different languages when needed and/or when they are accessible. We also use translators to help notify parents of programs and to answer questions parents might have. All ELL students participate in class trips, publishing celebrations and class events. Translated permission slips and invitations are sent home when needed and/or accessible. In addition to the after school program, we have sports (running club), drama (5th grade play) and band / chorus for 3rd through 5th grade students before, during, and after school that are free and part of the collaborations we have with outside companies and programs. Almost all of our upper grade ELL students choose to be in one ore more of these activities. All K students participate in the collaboration on yoga. All 2nd and 3rd grade students participate in chess class. This takes place in the classroom one day a week. All 3rd grade students participate in a collaboration with STREB. This is done in conjunction with their physical education classes. All 4th graders participate in ballroom dance, an outside program that takes place for 12 weeks once a week during the school day. These collaborations and programs are free for our students. Letters from the school (from individual classroom teachers and our Parent Coordinator) are sent or emailed home to families to let them know about the programs being offered, when they take place and how their child can participate. This year will be continuing our after school program for ELL students and their families. The program will take place once twice a week (Wednesdays and Thursdays 2:50-4:10) and led by our ESL teacher Nicole Nadeau and four other teachers. Students were placed in small groups and participated in stations that focused on different literacy skills and phonics. The teachers incorporated homework help as well. The program will also support families in ways they can work with their child on reading and math while at home. Invitations are being sent home to all ELL families. Monica Gutierrez-Kirwan will translate the invitation into Spanish. The program is free and will take place at the school right after dismissal. We 2018-19 CEP 67  are continuing this program to support the home-school connection and provide both students and families with strategies and skills for continued academic success. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. There are a variety of instructional materials, including technology, used to support ELLs that have already been mentioned. All classrooms have document cameras, projectors, laptops and computers. A number of classrooms have promethean boards. 4th and 5th grade have class sets of Chromebooks and laptops. Teachers and students use Google Classroom to share work and monitor progress. Most classrooms have Ipads or tablets as well. Our curriculum and intervention programs in all subjects and content areas use a multi-sensory approach to include all types of learners. Our balanced literacy program immerses students in multiple opportunities to read independently, read with the whole class and be read to throughout the day. Books based on a child's reading level are accessible to all students. Students read books on his or her reading level both in school and at home. Books are also provided to support the content areas. ELL students have access to books in their native language (Spanish and Arabic). This approach is extremely beneficial to our ELL students. Our Math program (TERC Investigations in K and Engage NY in 1-5) encourages the use of a variety of manipulatives in order to solve problems. Science is hands-on where students engage in inquiry and investigations. Science labs have a variety of animals and materials for students to observe first hand. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Though we do not have a TBE or Dual Language program at PS 29, we encourage students who are new to the program or country to read and/or write in their first language if they can do so. We encourage this until they feel more comfortable using English. We encourage parents to continue to develop the students’ first language at home by having students speak, read, and write in the first language when possible. The ESL teacher has books in Spanish in her library that she lends to students and parents. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. All of our required support services and resources correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels in order to support the curriculum and standards of each grade. Reading texts (both fiction and informational) are leveled. Students are provided with materials that support the curriculum and are on their independent reading level. Materials and curriculum are broken down to support the student’s understanding and to promote learning. Modifications and adaptations of the materials are created and used based on the student’s IEP. Students receive ENL services based on the standards. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? We do not share a building. PS 29 is the only school in our location. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). In order to assist newly enrolled ELL students before the beginning of the school year, the ENL teacher meets with them one-to-one to introduce herself and familiarize the students with the school in order to help them feel more comfortable before school begins. The ENL teacher also conducts an informal conversation with the student to informally assess their needs and to answer any questions the student or family has about the school and the ESL program. Translators are used when necessary. We will also be hosting various workshops and discussions for families of ELL students. Nicole Nadeau (ELL teacher) and Monica Guiterrez-Kirwan (Parent Coordinator) will be working on putting together a series of events for families to come to school. Various staff members will also be involved in these workshops and meetings depending on the topic. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? N/A 18. For schools with dual language programs: 2018-19 CEP 68  a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? N/A Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? PS 29 conducts professional development cycles on Monday afternoons for 80 minutes, as based on the current UFT contract. These take place every Monday when school is in session from September through June. These cycles provide opportunities for groups to focus on different questions and topics. We have 3-4 cycles each year. The cycles focus on lesson study, student work and intervistations, professional book clubs and staff development from outside individuals and programs. The ENL teachers and teachers of ELLs will meet during different cycles to collaborate and discuss ideas gleaned from shared reading of professional literature, classroom practices, and student data. These sessions also provide time for teachers to discuss units of study, plan curriculum aligned to CCLS, and develop strategies when working with our ELL students. As this takes place, the ENL teacher offers suggestions, provides input on optimal conditions for language acquisition, and answers questions to ensure a classroom environment that is conducive to acquiring English in a meaningful manner. Additionally the ENL teachers meets with the Assistant Principal, Halee Hochman to focus on specific goals around student learning and lesson planning. These meetings take place at least once a month usually the last Wednesday of each month during Nicole Nadeau’s prep. This is one-on-one professional development that has been taking place the last three years and will continue next year as well. The ENL teacher attends meetings with our ELL instructional support leader and other ELL teachers from various schools in Brooklyn. These meetings provide support for our ELL teachers regarding standards, lesson planning, application of strategies and methods of program delivery. If the ENL sole provider meetings continue this year our ENL teacher will be a participant in these meetings. These curricula are aligned to CCLS. Throughout the year, PS 29 works with two staff developers (K-2 and 3-5) from Teachers College Reading and Writing Project. During the 9 sessions, with each staff developer, time is spent working with classroom teachers analyzing student work, and planning lessons to incorporate modifications and supports for our ELL students. Our ENL teachers attends these meeting along with the grade teams. We are also incorporating cycles of inquiry into this type of staff development. A group of teachers from various grades will work together on a various topic that supports the goals for the school year. With support from each other and the staff developer at least one group will focus on topics that pertain to ELL students. This is our 4 year working with G&R for ICT support. Once a month the G&R staff developer visits the school and works with our ICT teams to support students with IEPs. Embedded in this work is suport for our ELL students who also have IEPs. When the staff developer meets with teams that are focusing on our ELL students our ENL teacher also attends the meeting. The staff developer will focus on strategies and supports that can be put in place for support language development and learning. The ENL teacher will attend meetings provided by the district and borough when the focus is relevant to the students she is working with. Additionally the Assistant Principal or the ENL teacher will also attend the ELL Coordinator meetings held by our network and attends meeting conducting by the Office of English Language Learners. Information obtained during these meetings is shared with members of the staff. 2018-19 CEP 69  2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. Professional Development (PD) at PS 29 is continuous and ongoing for all teachers, including the ENL teacher, and all teachers of ELLs. Throughout the year, teachers engage in professional development opportunities that address reading, writing, mathematics and Common Core Learning Standards. Teachers, including our ENL teacher, are attending professional development workshops at Teachers College. These workshops are lead by trained staff developers who are a part of the Teachers College Reading and Writing Project. There are various workshops that pertain specifically to English Language Learners. As part of our work with Teachers College we have the opportunity to send teachers to institutes and one day workshops. This year Nicole Nadeau, our ENL teacher, will attend a 2 day institute for ELL students. The institute is titled Adapting the Units of Study for English Language Learners. This institute will focus on the both reading and writing. On November 7, 2017 we will be sending two of our classroom teachers who work with our ELL students to a one day workshop titled Develop a Toolkit of Methods to Support English Language Learners in Becoming Stronger Readers and Writers. This workshop will focus on supporting our ELL students to develop a toolkit for teachers and students for reading and writing. This is a K-5 workshop. Teachers who attend this workshop will turnkey the information to their colleagues. On November 28 we will be sending two lower grade teachers who work with our ELL students to a one day workshop titled Ramping Up Shared Reading, Shared Writing, and Interactive Writing to Support Grammar and Writing Conventions for English Language Learners. This workshop will support language development and fluency. Teachers who attend this workshop will turnkey the information to their colleagues. Our ENL teacher will attend ELL workshops that focus on reading and writing. Using our Google Drive teachers upload their notes and visuals from the workshops. All teachers have access to the drive and the notes. Teachers also spend a grade meeting sharing the information they gained at the workshops. These workshops are being conducted throughout the school year by the Office of English Language Learners to support teachers who work with ELLs and our Borough Support Office. The curricula we use for reading, writing, content area (Teachers College Reading and Writing Project) and mathematics (TERC and Engage) contain suggestions for modifications, adaptations, and strategies to implement when working with ELL students. These curricula are aligned to CCLS. Throughout the year, PS 29 works with two staff developers (K-2 and 3-5) from Teachers College Reading and Writing Project. During the 9 sessions, with each staff developer, time is spent working with classroom teachers analyzing student work, and planning lessons to incorporate modifications and supports for our ELL students. Our ENL teachers attends these meeting along with the grade teams. We are also incorporating cycles of inquiry into this type of staff development. A group of teachers from various grades will work together on a various topic that supports the goals for the school year. With support from each other and the staff developer at least one group will focus on topics that pertain to ELL students. This is our 4 year working with G&R for ICT support. Once a month the G&R staff developer visits the school and works with our ICT teams to support students with IEPs. Embedded in this work is suptport for our ELL students who also have IEPs. When the staff developer meets with teams that are focusing on our ELL students our ENL teacher also attends the meeting. The staff developer will focus on strategies and supports that can be put in place for support language development and learning. In addition to the outside staff developers and support staff provided to all teachers at 29, each grade has a designated Literacy, Math, Technology, Social Studies and 4Rs Leader. The leaders meet continuously throughout the year with a member of the administration to focus on supporting, developing, and planning aspects of the curriculum and making sure what we do on a daily basis is aligned to CCLS. Leaders turnkey information developed, planned and discussed at these meetings with the other members of their grade. During these meetings ELL students and students with special needs are discussed and teachers share ways to support and modify work so that is accessible to all students. During all of the in house staff development meeting agendas are created and notes are shared via the Google Drive. 2018-19 CEP 70  Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? At the start of the school year we hold a "Meet and Greet" in our auditorium. This is an opportunity for families to meet and hear from various service providers, including our ENL teacher. The ENL teacher discusses the program and the goals of the program. Our Parent Coordinator and ENL teacher arranges for members of our PS 29 community to serve as translators for families who do note speak and/or understand English. In addition to the mandated parent orientation and the scheduled parent teacher conferences, classroom teachers and the ENL teacher meets individually with parents of ELL at least twice a year. Tuesday afternoons as part of the UFT contract are used to meet and/or talk with parents about the child's language development progress, assessments and needs. If a translator is needed our Parent Coordinator arranges for a member of of our staff to be at the meeting to translate. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Parental involvement at PS 29 is very strong. Throughout the school year, our Parent Coordinator collaborates with families, the PTA, the classroom parents, the administration and the staff to plan events that build community among and support the needs of our diverse student population. The first Friday of October each class has a "Welcome Breakfast" where all families are invited to visit the classroom and get to meet the other families in the class. We continue to have parents volunteering at lunchtime to improve the quality of the lunch experience. Several of our ENL parents do this. The Families as Learning Partners (FALP) helps bridge the gap between home and the classroom in order to help families better understand what it is going on in the classroom. FALP takes place the first Friday five times a year in all classrooms. Teachers also invite families in the classroom for publishing parties, unit collaborations and special projects. During our Harvest Week in October families volunteer to help out with particular activities in the classroom. One activity is making tortillas, which many of our Spanish speaking parents volunteer for in our Kindergarten classrooms. Invitations and information that is sent home regarding ways parents can be involved in our school is translated by a staff member in their preferred language. Staff members also make phone calls to let families about upcoming opportunities. Three years ago we started a Parents Cooking Circle. Each year it has grown and we will continue to have this program this year. This is organized by our Parent Coordinator, Monica Gutierrez-Kirwan. The intention of this program is to continue to strengthen our community and to celebrate our diversity, by learning about each other than through food. The Cooking Circle happens once a month, after drop-off, in the cafeteria. The idea is to teach a simple recipe that can be cooked in less than an hour and at the end, everyone can taste. It is similar to an enrichment cluster that we have for students but this is an opportunity for parents to come together and learn from one another. As part of the ENL after school program the students work on Reader’s Theater to build fluency and expression. The program is led by our ENL teacher, Nicole Nadeau. At the end of the program students will put on the play for parents and family members. Families are invited to attend this after school event. Invitations are sent out by Ms. Nadeau and translated by Monica Gutierrez-Kirwan. All parents are invited to participate in all of our activities and to voice their opinions on creating new ways to support the needs of our school community. We use translators when necessary to let parents know about events, to communicate other important information, and to ensure their voices are heard. We host a number of activities that are free of charge for all families to attend. For example during the year, we host a movie night in our yard, talent show, Super Science Saturday. These events are free of charge so all families are invited to attend. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Paste response here: 2018-19 CEP 71  2018-19 CEP 72 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Rebecca Fagin, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 CEP 73  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: School DBN: Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Title Principal Assistant Principal Parent Coordinator ENL/Bilingual Teacher Parent Teacher/Subject Area Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach School Counselor Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 2018-19 CEP 74  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 15K029 School Name: PS 29 John Harrigan Superintendent: An The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No (*Primary) * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. Translation needs are overseen by our Parent Coordinator with support from our ESL teacher. An initial survey of classroom teachers is conducted each September to elicit home language information based on the Home Language Survey and to identify which families require written translation and/or oral interpretation services. We also refer to the HLIS and intiital interview conducted by our fully licensed ESL teacher to determine if parents require or would like translated communication either in writing or when meeting with staff in person. Our Parent Coordinator maintains a database of these families by classroom and by language. She makes this information centrally available through our website so that others (school counselor, school nurse, PTA) can access the data. Throughout the year, our Parent Coordinator surveys classroom teachers to assess the needs of our parents to determine if written translations or oral interpretations are needed. 2018-19 CEP 75  2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Language Our data revealed that our translation needs are: Spanish, Arabic, and Mandarin Chinese. Our ESL teacher, administration and Parent Coordinator all work closely with the staff and school community to assure that students' needs are met and that families receive pertinent information in their native language; meetings are also translated, as necessary. Our Parent Coordinator surveys all classroom teachers to determine which parents need materials and/or meetings translated; our Parent Coordinator maintains her own databse, in which she records parents who need translation services. The perferred languages for both written and oral communication are: Spanish, Arabic and Chinese. She creates a list with the languages particular families speak and it is organized by class and grade. This document is available to all staff members. 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. 2018-19 CEP 76  Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. Documents that typically require translation are : the school calendar (including testing dates)- sent out in the beginning of the year; grade specific curriculum frameworks- sent out during Curriculum night; parent-teacher conference announcements (Nov and March), report card comments (Dec, March and June), PTA letters/emails- ongoing throughout the year; "Meet and Greet" announcement- September; flyers for special events and activites- throughout the year; and memos and letters sent out from our principal- throughout the year. We have been able to have these documents translated by members of our school community. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide interpretation service(s)? In September we host a curriculum night when families are invited to listen to teachers and talk about the current curriculum and expectations for the school year. We also host a "Meet and Greet" for families to hear from and meet the service providers and ESL teacher. In November each family will have a one-on-one conference time with their child's 2018-19 CEP 77  teacher as part of parent-teacher conferences. This will occur again in March. In May we invite families in to hear about the curriculum for the following year as part of an "Open House". 5 th grade families will meet with the guidance counselor to discuss middle schools, the application process and in the spring they meet to discuss the school that the student go in to for 6 th grade. Teachers hold informal meetings thoughout the year as well. This is based on need of the students and parents. Translations and interpretations are provided by members of our school community. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) Our Parent Coordinator is introduced at the September orientation for ESL families held by our ESL teacher. At this time, our Parent Coordinator informs families about the DOE translation unit and the ability for school communication to be sent out for translations for families who need this service. Families request that duplicate documents are still sent home in English, due to the translation component not being exact (either their children or another adult can clarify the information using both documents). In addition, classroom teachers and our class parent network inform our parent coordinator about other families requiring translation services. We also will use the notification documents that are found at the Translation and Interpretation Unit's intranet site. 2018-19 CEP 78  Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? We will use the NYC survey as well as our own specific surveys that will be conducted by our Parent Coordinator. Our SLT will also conduct surveys to gather feedback from parents. Our Diversity Team will also gather feedback from families across the year. 2018-19 CEP 79 
