2018-19 COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (CEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 20K030 School Name: I.S. 30 MARY WHITE OVINGTON Principal: CAROL HEERAMAN 2018-19 CEP 1  Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 CEP 2  School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: Section 1: School Information Page School Information PS/IS 30 Mary White Ovington 20K030 332000010030 K-8 School Number (DBN): K-2 grade at 415 Ovington Avenue, Brooklyn, 11209 Grades 3-8 at 7002 4 th Avenue, Brooklyn, NY 11209 School Address: 718 -491-8440 main 718-491-5684 annex 718-491-8445 main Phone Number: 718-491-0071 annex Fax: Carol Heeraman cheeraman@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Email Address: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Carol Heeraman Joshua Houston Co-Presidents: Rebecca Cartagenaand Natasha Pimentel Joshua Houston N/A N/A Michelle Delorenzo District Information Geographical District: 20 Superintendent’s Office Address: Karina Costantino Superintendent: 415 89 th Street, Brooklyn, NY, 11209 KCostan@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718 759 4912 Phone Number: 718-759-4842 Fax: 2018-19 CEP 3  Field Support Center (FSC) Brooklyn South D20 Mauriciere de Govia FSC: Executive Director’s Office Address: Executive Director: 415 89 th Street, Brooklyn, NY 11209 MDegovi@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 718-759-4862 Phone Number: 718-759-4960 Fax: 2018-19 CEP 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Carol Heeraman Joshua Houston Rebecca Cartagena N/A N/A N/A N/A Michelle Delorenzo Nadine Mastrogiacomo Safaa Moustafa Rhianna Moustapha *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, NIA Member/ Teacher Member/ Teacher Member/ Teacher 2018-19 CEP 5  Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) AyaAly Larissa Pena Aida Ahmad Natasha Pimentel Elisa Koppenhoefer Member/ Teacher Member/ Parent Member/Parent Member/ Co-President parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Member/ Member/ 2018-19 CEP 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with 2018-19 CEP 7  the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement 2018-19 CEP 8  Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Our K-8 Professional Learning Community Culture will provide our children with coherent and cohesive interdisciplinary curricula that include the Sciences and the Arts (STEAM) delivered through research-based teaching and learning practices. We believe the foundation for academic success is achievable through: 1) Staff knowing the individual needs of our students, 2) Staff providing each student with the resources s/he needs to grow and develop into active learners, 3) Both students and parents being active participants who take ownership for learning, and 4) 2018-19 CEP 9  The school community providing the resources and opportunity to ensure that each student is prepared for his/her next educational level. At PS/IS 30, we ensure a safe and secure school environment dedicated to teaching Respect for ALL and developing strong, conscientious, caring, and resourceful students. The Positive Behavior Intervention Support program (PBIS), driven by our core values (ROAR) Respect, Opportunity, Acceptance, and Resilience , will embed in our students a sense of pride and respect for oneself, each other, and the community. We believe that active parental involvement plays a major role in students’ achievement; our students do best when parents are involved. We believe that our students should be active members in our school and surrounding community by partnering with community-based organizations and participating in service learning to encourage development, responsibility, and accountability. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. PS/IS 30 Mary White Ovington is located in Bay Ridge, Brooklyn. We are one of six K-8 schools in District 20. We are unique in that we grew our elementary grades (K-5), starting in 2012-13 with kindergarten, adding on to an established middle school program that included grades six through eight. As we grew our elementary grades, every year was a transitional year with the addition of that new grade. We are finally at full capacity for the 2018-2019 school year. A unique feature at PS/IS 30 is we have the only Dual Language (DL) Arabic program in New York State. Our DL program started 5 years ago with our first kindergarten classes. We created a partnership with Qatar Foundation Inc (QFI), who is providing our teachers and staff with professional development opportunities and supporting us as we grow our DL program K-8. Our program is a two-way immersion program where our students receive instruction of Arabic in 2 major content subjects and Arabic Language Arts (ALA), which is taught by a teacher of Arabic. The remaining subjects are taught in English. Our instructional model is a side by side model where our students spend half of their day learning Arabic and the other half learning English with two teachers. The composition of our students is 50/50, where half of our students are English as New Language Learners (ENLs), and the other half are native speakers of English. Our DL classes have made significant academic strides in comparison to the students not enrolled in dual language classes. We are a Middle School Quality Initiative (MSQI) Extra school. MSQI focuses on improving adolescent literacy to ensure all our students enter high school on or above grade reading level and prepared for careers and college. Students in grades 6-8 will be participating in three MSQI “What I Need” (WIN) periods per week. During these periods we will focus on implementing targeted instruction in Math and ELA based on students’ need. We have partnered with a community based organization (CBO), Neighborhood Improvement Association (NIA) and ExpandED to provide the “extra” support for our students. This is our sixth year partnering with MSQI and ExpandED, and we have been working in tandem to accomplish the goal of ALL students graduating at or above reading level. The "extra” extends beyond the school day and focuses on implementing a comprehensive after school program where students are involved in the arts, sports, leadership opportunities, academics, and clubs to enhance and promote well-rounded adolescents. We utilize a model of a seamless day to truly integrate our efforts to support our students. We are continuing the work on building our K-8 STEAM initiative as stated in our mission; we believe our students need to be prepared for college and careers beginning in kindergarten by providing opportunities in 21st Century 2018-19 CEP 10  learning. To this end we are one of the initial pilot schools (20 city schools) with an established Software Engineering Program (SEP). Our students, starting in 6th grade, get 2-3 hours of classes per week of SEP. In this program students are introduced to computer programming, web design, robotics and more. Our elementary grades have been focusing on creating interdisciplinary projects where students are demonstrating their design, inquiry, and critical thinking skills. We are hoping the funding will be provided to add computer programming to our upper elementary students this year and in the future. Our recruitment of teachers is a rigorous process because we believe that our students deserve teachers who are caring, passionate, bright, creative, and who exude a love for teaching and learning. When you walk into our building that passion is evident on every floor and in every classroom. Our District 20 Superintendent, Karina Costantino, has made it a mission for Principals to collaborate and share best practices. My neighboring Elementary Colleagues have been tremendously gracious whenever we have reached out for guidance. This school year we are continuing with our Principal Teams and we were assigned to schools based on our needs as Leaders. In addition, the Superintendent implemented AP Institutes for new and seasoned APs which will provide Leaders with the capacity to do more for students and staff. Our 2016-17 school year our District embarked on new learning on Emotional Intelligence with Principals. This learning has provided leaders with a new set of communication lens to create a conducive social-emotional learning environment where teachers and students can grow and succeed. The District will continue to provide this learning opportunity for leaders and school staff as we build capacity in this endeavor. With our continuous thrive in building capacity around collaborative teachers we have partnered with the UFT Center and they have provided us with the resources to have a UFT Teacher Center at PS/IS 30. They have assisted in the hiring process and we have found a coach who will assist the Administration in coaching, supporting, and providing professional development for our staff. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. As we grow our student population every year we are also growing in our Student with disabilities (SWDS) and our English as a New Language Learners (ENLs). This school year 2018-19 we will have 5 self-contained classes: 3 bridge classes in the elementary grades and 2 in the middle school band. We have at least one ICT classroom on each grade. We have noticed through observations: I. Our students receiving effective differentiated lessons in every classroom every period is a work in progress. For 2018-19 we will continue to focus on active progress monitoring for our SWDs and ENLs. All teachers and paraprofessionals will be able to assist students using targeted tools to address a specific skill and monitor student's mastery through that specific skill. II. Our students are not receiving the appropriate attention on how to wean off the scaffolds and supports as we prepare them for the next grade. For 2018-19 the focus will be to provide case managers with professional development on how to effectively monitor students' progress through their IEP goals and toward ENL proficiency. Case managers and ENL teachers will be able to manage students' portfolios and give the students the opportunity to self-assess their learning goals for each course. III. Our SWDs in our Elementary grades present more of a behavioral need than academic, and we recognize the behavioral does interrupt the instructional day. For this need, we have established a crisis intervention team (CIT), where every member was trained and certified in Therapeutic Crisis Intervention for Schools. The focus for this school year is to implement our crisis plan which will entail teaching of behavior support techniques to all staff and providing 2018-19 CEP 11  them with information on reaching the CIT when in need. We are also identifying a SAFE space for our students when in crisis. IV. Our ENLs are also a growing population in our Elementary grades. We have noticed by providing students with bilingual support during core instruction is an instructional method that is producing positive results. Our goal is to have our ENLs reach commanding proficiency by the time they enter 5th grade, so they are ready for the core, rigorous content reading in the middle school and high school grades. In addition, we have noticed the amount of missed instructional time our ELLs V. As with SWDs our ENLs are not receiving enough scaffolds and differentiation to access the curriculum according to their individual needs. Our focus for 2018-19 is to use Data Driven Inquiry and Instruction (DDII) to provide more targeted instruction for our students. Our students will receive assessments that will provide teachers with clear and isolated skills that present challenges. Students will receive lessons on those specific skills until mastery. This targeted instruction will occur during WIN periods. VI. During the previous school year (2017-18) our BFSC introduced the text "Leading Advanced LIteracy Instruction to promote ENLs Achievement." We created a book club with ENL teachers and content teachers to review the contents of the text. We will build upon this work and implement 2 hallmarks with fidelity for 2018-19. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. The 2017- 2018 School Quality Guide (SQG) showed that we demonstrated growth in each of the components using our multi-year summary. The component in which we saw some improvement, but not enough was Supportive Environment. We made the most progress in Strong Family-Communities Ties. This component has been an ongoing area of focus for us and it continues to be, even though we saw growth. We are strong believers in active parent involvement as stated in our Mission and Vision. Our PTA and SLT members are continuously searching for ways to improve our parent attendance at PTA meetings and school events. Our parents show up for events when children are being celebrated. The SLT would like to see more parental involvement in the middle school grades. School and District elements of the Framework for Great Schools which will be a focus for school year 2018-2019. Rigorous Instruction Based on the SQG we received a 4.04 score which is a great overall score. Upon further analysis of the data there were some student and teacher concerns that are be addressed in our action plan. The School/District goal: By June 2019, PS/IS 30 teachers will utilize the process of data-driven inquiry and instruction (DDII) to design and implement project-based learning aligned to Math and ELA Common Core Learning Standards with a focus on advanced literacy skills with scaffolds and supports for all students; including students with disabilities, English as a New Language Learners, and advanced students as evidenced by a summary of Advance reports focusing on indicators 1E and 3C, quarterly benchmarks, and State assessments. Collaborative Teachers Based on the SQG we received a 4.19 score, which is a great overall score. Upon further analysis of the data we have to focus on providing enough time on professional development topics for teachers to think about and evaluate new 2018-19 CEP 12  ideas. Teachers requested visiting schools within the District to share best practices. Plans for this element will be detailed in the action plan. The School/District goal: By June 2019, 100% of teachers will engage in grade level data inquiry teams in order to analyze a range of sources of data from students and teachers to discern student strengths and challenges, research potential strategies, tailor instruction and identify appropriate RTI resources for all students; including students with disabilities, English as a New Language learners, and advanced students as measured by the alignment of state exam scores, students' portfolios, common assessments, and Advance reports. Effective School Leadership Based on the SQG we received 3.33 overall score on this element. Upon analysis of the data the concerns were from teachers regarding instructional programs. This would be addressed in the action plan. The School/District goal: By June 2019, PS/IS 30 the Principal and the Administrative staff will provide 100% of teachers and classroom staff, including paraprofessionals, with purposeful and targeted professional development to build horizontal and vertical coherent instructional practices to improve achievement for all students; including English as a New Language learners, students with disabilities, and advanced students as measured by increases of at least 3% on the 2019 state ELA and Math exams. Supportive Environment Based on the SQG we received a 2.75 overall score on this element. We have been working very hard on this element over the past years as we merged our grades K-8. However with the growing negative factors amongst our adolescents and community we have to do some analysis and provide better supports for all our students. We have initiated programs such as Leader in Me (LIM) and Safe Public Space (SPS), but have not had the opportunity to gauge enough time to sustain the elements of the programs, thus the results do not impact the students as they should. By June 2019, 100% of PS/IS 30 staff will utilize the practices and protocols of the Leader in Me program in classrooms daily to support the social-emotional learning needs of all students. This will be measured by quarterly OORS reports and end of year 2018 - 2019 School Quality Guide. 2018-19 CEP 13  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 20K030 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 0K,01,02,03,04,05,06,07,08 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 911 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language YES Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 27 27 31 7 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 22 16 39 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 80.0% % Attendance Rate 75.6% % Reduced Lunch 22.9% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.2% 30.2% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 43.8% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 7.89 0% 13% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 56.6% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A YES YES YES YES Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A YES YES YSH YES Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A NO YES N/A YES High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 70 70 13 11 95.8% 4.2% 20.3% 1.5% 23.5% 1.0% 4 15% 6.4 54.0% 60% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No N/A YES N/A NO YES N/A YES N/A YES YES N/A N/A N/A N/A NO N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 CEP 14  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. The SQG report 2017-18 revealed we scored 4.04 rating in Rigorous Instruction (RI) compared to similar city schools. Even though this is a great score, further analysis of the elements of this components revealed some teacher and student concerns which directly impact on students' achievement. The June 2018 Instructional report revealed that we made progress in each domain in Math for each grade and the same for ELA in reading and writing compared to last year's Instructional report. No definite scores are available to make deeper predictions on the percentage of students meeting and exceeding proficiency grade levels in Math and ELA. Strengths ● The ELA curriculum is established, strong and comprehensive, especially in the 3-4 and 6-8 grades. Based on the SQG 100% of teachers of all subjects say that they had the resources to include opportunities for students to interact with academic language. ● 100% of teachers of all subjects say that they had the resources to focus deeply on the concepts emphasized in the standards to help students build strong foundations for learning. ● 100% of teachers of all subjects say that they had the resources to link standards from previous grades to current grades so students knowledge/skills build onto previous learning as foundations for math concepts. ● Collaborative Teams are growing and and learning as teachers share best practices during peer inter- visitation and Cycles of Inquiry using the "Japanese Lesson Study" protocol. The administrative Team consist of 4 administrators who are all focused on supporting all teachers to ensure a high level of rigorous and purposeful instruction for all students.  Teachers are receptive to growth and improving their craft.  The Math teachers have a viable program to use a resource to build their daily lessons and units.  Common planning time for departments to deepen the work in the content. Needs 2018-19 CEP 15  ● We need teaching that is focused on critical thinking and problem solving.  Focus on the meeting the needs of all the students during the instructional core, tier 1 level of instruction. ● 60 % of students say that the homework assignments help them learn the course material. What's happening with the other 40% of our students? 63% of our students say that they learn a lot from feedback on their work? Are the other 37% receiving feedback on their work? 55% of students say they are challenged in their classes. 45% of students say teachers ask difficult questions in class. 60% of teachers say students respond to challenging questions in class. ● Teacher Teams need more time for planning, implementing, modifying curriculum, and checks for understanding on effective students' learning, especially addressing the needs of subgroups SWDs and ELLs. ● An established and comprehensive assessment system that tracks students’ progress and monitoring of interventions. ● An established and clear system in place where all teachers are using data driven common instructional strategies that are focused on improving critical thinking skills for students in all academic areas. Establish clear Instructional non-negotiable for all classrooms to address the elements of a rigorous classroom: instruction, outcomes, strategies, and learning activities derived from standards; purposeful and thoughtful groupings based on real-time data; lessons and teaching materials reflect the diverse students' needs. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, PS/IS 30 [in accordance with our District goal to accelerate learning and instruction] will continue to build coherent instructional and social emotional supports to improve student achievement for all students, including English Language Learners, students with disabilities and advanced students through a collaborative inquiry model. By providing students with a supportive environment both academically and social/ emotionally, students will show an increase of at least 3% on NYS ELA and Math exams; as evidenced by a summary of Advance reports focusing on indicators 1E and 3C, quarterly benchmarks, and State assessments. 2018-19 CEP 16  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Activities/Strategies Beginning in September with diagnostic assessments, and other student data, teachers will identify students' needs and group them accordingly. Simultaneously, teachers would use the available curriculum to plan and prepare engaging lessons based on students ' needs. Departmental/Grade Teams will conduct their Cycle of Inquiry to identify learner centered problems utilizing Data Wise protocol and adjust core instructional routines, in order to meet the expectations outlined 1E and 3C in the Danielson Framework. Teams will be using the research-based "Japanese Lesson Study" protocol to conduct Inquiry team meetings. These lesson study will focus on Domains 1 and 3, specifically 1E and 3C. Planning and Preparation and Student Engagement. Teams will use a common "looking at student work protocol", identifying learner-problem, researching strategies and collaborating to modify instruction and lesson plans to meet the needs of all students, including SWDs, ELLs and Advanced students. Departmental Teams will meet on their given weekly common planning period. Grade Teams for the upper grade will meet once a month on a Monday. Tuesdays' PD time will be used based on the needs of the teachers to conduct real-time discussions, reflection, and re-planning on best practices based on students' work products and assessments. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Principal, APs, Teacher-Team Leaders, Expeditionary Consultant, MSQI consultant, Data Specialist, UFT Teacher Center Coach All teachers K-8. Para-professionals. September 2018-October 2018 -Diagnostic October 2018- November 2018 Inquiry Cycle I November 2018 -April 2019 Inquiry Cycles II, and III 2018-19 CEP 17 Students in need of AIS were identified using the State cut-off scores and DRP and will receive small group instruction during the school day 3 times per week during their "what I need" (WIN) periods. Targeted students in grades 6-8 will be addressed except the Superintendent classes. Teachers of grades 6-8. September 2018- June 2019 Principal, APs, Teacher-Team Leaders, Expeditionary Consultant, MSQI consultant, Algebra for All Consultant. UFT Teacher Center Coach, Data Specialist, IEP Teacher Teachers will be trained in the MSQIExtra program and will use this program to address the needs of the students assigned. Students will grouped for AIS based on need. In partnership with ExpandEDSchools, some students will be in book clubs which will be facilitated by "tutors" hired by our CBO-NIA in collaboration with ExpandEDSchools consultant. This year we will receive 6 tutors. MSQI coordinator and MSQI consultant will train and assist teachers in the roll out of the MSExtra lessons. Students will receive intervention in both literacy and math. Funding was used to purchase the following programs: Rewards, Great Leaps, and IXL. All WIN teachers will be held accountable for the group of the students they teach. Teacher Teams will meet monthly for PD based on the outcomes of the observations teacher request/need. PD will focus on the data based on students' work and assessments. Each month beginning in September the school will focus on a topic and teachers will work on a smaller scale within their Teams to address the needs. Teams will use the school-wide protocols established for "looking at student work", "revising a rubric, lesson plan, assessment". Common planning Teams for the All subjects will focus on looking at curriculum, Instruction and assessment of the subject and make the required adjustments based on the student outcomes. Focus on teaching using the Standards as the bar is critical in this work. The PD plan for the school year will be specific and purposeful to strengthen collaborative teams and build teacher ability to interpret and utilize data. Retrain middle school teachers in the use of Skedula and pupil path (iO Insight). Train Elementary teacher K-5 in the use of Skedula and Pupil path. Administrators and GCs will be able to monitor students' progress daily, weekly, quarterly in order to implement right on time intervention. Teachers will be trained to take daily attendance, anecdotal, and maintain daily grading of assignments so both students and parents can effectively receive feedback and act on next steps. ALL teachers October 2018- June 2019 Principal, APs, Team-Leaders, Consultants, UFT Teacher center Coach ALL teachers September 2018- October 2019 iO Insight consultant, Programmer, Technology Coordinator, Principal, APs, 2018-19 CEP 18  3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. During the first Parent/ Teacher Conference in September all parents will receive a "year in review" of their child and the academic expectation. Parents will meet with the Principal for an initial presentation and then be sent to the classrooms to meet with teachers and discuss specific expectation of each subject. During SLT we discussed providing the middle school parents with more opportunities for parent involvement and workshops to guide parents in monitoring homework assignments and assisting their child. We would like for our families to witness the connection we are attempting to make between the classroom learning and the real-world for all students. Students should be able to make sense of the core concepts they are learning in the classroom and relate it to their everyday lives. This is the premise of PBL. We have 2 guidance counselors who would monitor students' quarterly report cards, meet with students and intervene with interventions for the student to improve academic performance if needed. GCs will be monitoring how students are performing during their WIN periods and communicating with teachers and parents. Guidance counselors will be assigned to specific grades and address the needs of their grades as well as create and plan academic initiatives for parents and students to ensure academic success. Guidance counselors will be asked to conduct monthly workshops with parents during parent engagement based on the needs of the grade. Maintain a log of the topics and follow-up with the parents as required/needed. Guidance counselors will be asked to plan with the activities coordinator college trips and career day for each grade as we prepare our students for the experience of college and careers. The Guidance counselors together with the psychologist will be responsible for leading the SIT and PPT monthly meetings. The Principal will oversee the duties and responsibilities of the GCs. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. The majority of the Professional development for teachers will occur on Mondays from 2:20 pm to 3:40 pm, where teachers will be working within their collaborative learning teams using the cycle of inquiry to conduct their meetings. The 3 WIN periods and the common planning is part of teachers' instructional week (25 periods). Created 3 out of classrooms teacher support positions to provide the support to staff and students with the implementation of the data driven instruction inquiry initiative. With the addition of the new grade and new teachers, adding a UFT teacher Center coach to provide onsite coaching and mentoring is a high leverage move to support the work. Budget will be allocated to purchase Science materials for Middle school grades. 2018-19 CEP 19  Budgeting funding for per session to conduct weekly data Team meeting with a teacher representative from each grade. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A X C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind X Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. The instructional team and Teacher teams together with Supervisors will conduct an analysis on the students' performance and teacher pedagogue beginning with baseline and diagnostic assessments administered in September through October. Benchmarks are set for November 27th, February 26 and May 21. Advance Observation reports conducted by the evaluators from on Domain 1E and Domain 3C will be compared every quarter during cabinet meetings to ensure we are addressing and supporting teachers and students using effective feedback and observing the growth in the classroom in meeting the needs of all students with a specific focus on SWDs and ENLLs. The Cycle of Inquiry has a built in monitoring system for teachers which they analyze as they look at student work. This school year Elementary K-2 teachers suggested they would like to more time for vertical and horizontal planning to build on our best practices addressing the needs of all learners. Teacher teams will also utilize the protocol for peer inter-visitations and monitor their cycles of inquiry every 6 weeks or at the end of their unit or lesson. All Teacher Teams will analyze their progress based on students’ outcomes and revise their plans based on need using the "bridge to practice" session at the end of each Inquiry cycle. All middle school students will be given the DRP (degree of reading performance) in the September, January and May to measure students' progress. Teachers Teams and Supervisors will meet to discuss and review students' portfolios at the end of every quarter to measure student growth and next steps. Monthly meetings with GCs with the Principal after SIT and PPT to gather updates on students' performance and next steps for students in need of assistance. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) Performance in math and ELA will be monitored in September, January and May utilizing Performance Series, the DRP, and running records depending upon grade level. Quarterly assessments embedded in all content area curriculum will provide additional data with reference to the students' progress towards meeting grade level instructional benchmarks. The progress of middle school math students will further be tracked through their use of IXL. Advance Summary reports, focused on indicators 1E and 3C, will be reviewed quarterly based on the observation time-line. 2018-19 CEP 20  Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 21  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? According to the SQG 2017-2018 the element supportive environment our strength is safety, where 84% of students feel safe in their classrooms and traveling between home and school. Another strength is 87% of our middle schoolers say the school provides guidance and educates families about the application/enrollment process for high school. The priorities that need to be addressed this year according to 2017-18 SQG is students feeling supported and challenged academically. The SQG shows only 59% of students responded positively to receiving peer support for academic work. For this school year 2018-19 we are continuing with the Leader in Me (LIM) process without the grant funding at this time. According to the SQG we decreased in this component by 13% compared to our District schools. The survey revealed students have a different perspective than teachers do about what a supportive environment should look like and sound like. Under classroom behavior 36% of students responded in most or all of their classes, most students behave well even when the teacher isn't watching. However, the teachers responded 59% of their students behave well in class even when the teacher isn't watching. The overall outcome is teachers rate their and each other teaching habits and management styles much higher than students experience. Seventy percent of teachers agreed they need more training and/or support in addressing the social emotional needs of all students. This 2016-2017 initiative with LIM did not come to fruition. However, we will be placing more emphasis on creating a more supportive and safe environment for students....Through LIM we will be creating a student lighthouse committee (SLC) consisting of student representative from each class. The main goal of the SLC will be to brainstorm ideas on how they can contribute to a supportive environment at PS/IS 30. We have recognized a need for more Social Emotional Learning strategies and workshops for parents, staff, and students. We have an in-house consultant from the DOH, Daniel Fayerberg, who will be assisting our School Assessment Team to create a stronger plan and put systems in place to address the needs of our students K-8. This school year 2017-2018 our partnership with the Department of Health, to provide resources for our parents and teachers on Mental Health continues. Our teachers will be retrained in Kognito's at Risk suite. This is an evidenced-based online training tool offered K-12 staff on how to recognize early signs and symptoms of psychological distress in students and approach and connect students in need of resources. There is a high need for information on "how to assist my child at home" being requested from parents as well as students. We are working with the DOH to address these needs by providing workshops for parents and staff on how to address the mental health needs of our students. This school year we have eliminated the advisory program and added an additional Guidance Counselor to address the SEL of our students and support our families. With the additional guidance counselor we will be able to assign GC 2018-19 CEP 22  to specific grades and provide time for in classroom sessions, monthly grade meetings, celebrations, and events to promote a supportive environment for all students. Students are also provided an opportunity to work on school-wide projects like Respect for All and other service learning opportunities. More emphasis needs to be placed on our ROAR principles and 7 Habits. The survey revealed that 34% of students agreed or strongly agreed that most students at their school treat each other with respect. Based on the 2017 Survey Student-Teacher Trust is the lowest number 59% of students agreed or strongly agreed that their teachers always do what they say they will do. We began the year 2016-17 with a workshop for teachers on implementing Student-Led Conferences (SLC). The plan for this school year is to prepare our teachers and students to conduct a SLC for the March 2017 parent/teachers conference. This goal did not come to fruition for our 2016-17 school year. However, it is a goal for the 2017-18 school year. For the 2016-17 school year we embarked on a program called Safe Public Space (SPS) with Engaging Schools. The Program set out to accomplish several goals for students and staff: 1. Establish a school environment where staff, students, and their families feel safe and cared for while navigating public spaces. 2. Equip all staff with the mindsets and skills needed to promote good behavior, prevent potential misbehaviors, and productively respond to a range of disciplinary infractions that show up in public spaces. 3. Combines consistent, respectful, and firm disciplinary responses with strategies that aim to keep students in their learning environment and provide them with the supports they need. In order for SPS to work, it requires the collective responsibility, collaboration, and involvement of the entire staff. All staff members who interacted with children were trained including Safety officers and Kitchen staff. We implemented 3 strategies: Meet and Greet; Effective reminders and directives; and defusing students who are emotionally charged. We will continue this program for the 2017-2018 school year. Strengths Grade teacher- leaders to conduct monthly grade meetings to celebrate students’ accomplishments. A system in place that is not punitive but proactive in providing students with a positive environment to learn and grow. The staff realizes that better relationship building is necessary to address the needs of all our students and to create an environment that is nurturing, caring, and academically rigorous. Two Deans to support students and staff as we grow our K-8 environment. Two Guidance counselors to support students and staff as we grow our k-8 environment. We have a 92% teacher-teacher trust.; 3% decrease from last year We have a 97% parent – teacher trust; 1% increase from last year We have a 97 % parent- principal trust ; 1% increase from last year 2018-19 CEP 23  We have an 81 % teacher-principal trust…..based on the SQG: Framework for Great schools report 2017, a 2% decrease from last year. Sustained school-uniform policy for all students. Needs Based on the 2016-2017 survey: ● 78% of students have a positive Student - teacher relationship a 5% increase from last year. We need a consistent, strategic, and smooth framework for implementing PBIS. ● Students being held accountable for their learning. ● Effective parental-support. ● Students are falling through the cracks academically because of the gap in the relationships among students and student/teacher. ● Effective monitoring system to identify and support student during the school year. ● Teacher training on how to effectively create a culture of trust and build meaningful relationships with students to promote trust. Accountability system for students so they are invested in their learning and they can self-assess their growth and become more autonomous in creating their success. Based on the SQG 2017 all students responses on the personal attention and support questions were only 56% positive. Only 46% of students responded in most or all of their classes, their teachers support them when they are upset. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 100% of PS/IS 30 staff will utilize the practices and protocols of the Leader in Me program in classrooms daily to support the social-emotional learning needs of all students. This will be measured by quarterly OORS reports, and the end of year 2018-2019 School Quality Guide. 2018-19 CEP 24  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs,  professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). We received the opportunity to participate in a 5 year SEL process with the Leader in Me/LEAD program...this program was discontinued due to lack of funding from the State. However, the program will continue with the local funding. The program is taken from the work of Steven Covey and our partnership with his Group will constitute da 2-day hard–core training of all staff and then consistent roll out of the modules of the all the characteristics of effective people with teams of teachers during the school year. All staff, including school aides, secretaries, security guards and custodial staff. All students. September 2018- June 2019 Principal, APs, Guidance Counselors, Deans, Grade Team Leaders, Staff, UFT Teacher center Coach The process is a whole-school initiative to improve school culture. Research has shown that the Leader in me and LEAD programs have directly impacted academic growth and parental engagement. The process is all comprehensive and includes all stakeholders within the school community. For the 2017-18 school year we will seek out the partnership with Covey Inc but continue to work with local funding to continue to guide us in this process. Training for all staff on effectively monitoring behavioral and academic needs of students, once recognized, refer students to the Team for services. All teaching staff including paraprofessionals. September 2018- June 2019 We established a crisis intervention team in 2016-17 and each member attended training for TCIS. We realised all teachers need to be trained in being able to recognize students in crisis and or students in an emotional state and address their needs. We will be working with the BFSC to provide training for all teaching staff including Paraprofessionals on basic behavior management and de-escalation strategies. Establish clear process for referring students to PPT and SIT Teams. Ensure all staff are trained in the look fors and the process before referring. Based on our 2 locations we will have to establish contact personnel to represent the K-2 and the 3-8 students to maintain effective communication and consistency. Principals, APs, GCs, Deans, Crisis Intervention Team, Mental Health Consultant, UFT Teacher center Coach 2018-19 CEP 25 Parents will participate in workshops to learn about the routines in process and how they can assist at home with continuing routines and tools on Student Led Conferences. Parents and Guardians September 2018- June 2019 Principal, PTA, Parent Coordinator, AP, Guidance Counselors, Deans Parents will receive new training in the use of pupil path in grades K-8. All teachers K-8 will receive training in the new features of iO Insights AKA Skedula and provided with the required expectations on how the system will be monitored and used to hold students and staff accountable as evidence of students' records. Lighthouse Committee will be meeting monthly to address the progression of the process of the Student Lighthouse Committee. Principal will recruit students to create the Student Lighthouse committee. Principal will lead the SLHC and conduct monthly meetings. The focus will be for students to become an active part of the school environment and culture by recommending activities and making decisions where they see they can improve the school environment. All Teaching Staff K-8 September 2018- June 2019 Principal, APs, Deans, Guidance Counselors, Team Leaders. LIM Students and LIM teachers September 2018- June 2019 Principal, Grade Team leaders, Light House Committee 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Parents will be asked to play an active role in this supportive environment action plan. Parents will be provided opportunities for ongoing workshops on skedula and the curriculum during PTA meetings, Tuesday parent engagement time, and Parent/Teachers conference days. Workshops will be facilitated by Parent Coordinator, Lead Teachers, and/or APs and Principal. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. This school year 2017-2018, as stated we have limited funding, but we are working on a grant for next year. We are working together as a Team to address the needs of the students. The results of the students' will be shared with teachers on the SLT and to all the Teachers and we will be working collaboratively to address the needs of our students. The Principal will recruit the students for the SLHC and then share this information with the LHC and the Grade Team Leaders. All classes will have 2 student representative from each class. The responsibilities of the Student Light House Committee will be, but not exclusively:  Being the voice of the classroom, greeting visitors  Participating in the leadership roles we have established: announcements, monitors,  Planning for service learning opportunities will be a major part of SLHC; providing an opportunity for students to give back to their community.  Planning on how NIA (community-based organization) can participate in this initiative as we continue to embed our seamless day. 2018-19 CEP 26   Improving parent-engagement K-8. How can we get our parents more involved in the school community? Students conducting and presenting at the PTA/SLT meetings to present their ideas and action plans. The Administrative staff, Dean, Guidance, and Coaches will be facilitating the PDs to all the staff on the roll-out and expectations of the program. PTA president will collaborate with Principal and parent coordinator to schedule workshops to inform parents on how to assist the school on at-home routines to reinforce positive behaviors and expectations for all students. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA Title II, Part A SIG X PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Program process will be monitored by the monthly Agendas and minutes and from the adult LHC and the Student LHC. The process of the Student Led Conferences will be monitored by the agendas and minutes from the adult LHC and the Student LHC. The Advisory teacher will also be presenting lessons to students on how to organise their work and asking the questions required for them to demonstrate clear understanding of the curriculum. Grade Teacher Teams will also be asked to conduct surveys and evaluate how the process is impacting students’ learning time. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Agendas and minutes from meetings. Have students create and administer a survey of the process as we improve the culture and learning environment for our students. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 27  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. According to our 2017 SQG 71% our teachers responded positively to the questions on the quality of professional development. The two items scored under 70% were: 1) 69% of teachers agreed or strong agreed their professional development experiences this year have included enough time to think carefully about, try, and evaluate new ideas. 2) 56% of teachers agreed or strongly agreed their professional development experiences this year have included opportunities to work productively with teachers from other schools. Our instructional focus for this school year is implementing Scaffold and Differentiation in every lesson to ensure engagement for all students. All teachers will receive the bottom line non-negotiable expectations we have outlined as a school; based on the various needs of our teachers we have to provide support based on their needs. All teachers will participate in the overall instructional goals of the school by participating (weekly/biweekly) Team meeting conducting Cycles of Inquiry with the Instructional focus using the "Japanese Lesson Study" protocol. The Japanese Lesson study is a research-based process that provides a model for large scale, sustainable professional development where teachers are encouraged to develop their own communities of inquiry into their teaching practices. We recognize that teachers, as students, learn best by doing and building on their own understandings rather than being told. The Japanese Lesson Study provides an opportunity for teachers to experiment with classroom practices and analyse it in detail. This school year the Instructional Team will be re-established which will consist of adding a SPED, ENL teachers, Guidance Counselor, and Dean to a monthly cabinet meeting. The purpose of the Instructional Team is to provide the Cabinet with additional insight on what is happening in the classroom and how PD plans need to be modified to meet the needs of the teachers to be successful. Principal Heeraman will establish a "New Teacher Academy" for all 0-2 years teachers to a monthly meeting. Initial topics will be provided, and later topics will be generated from the teacher group. The District 20's initiative in creating the Cohort collaborative environment among Principals and APs will continue for this year 2018-19. To meet the need of teachers, they will be sent to visit to the cohort schools of the Principal and APs. Professional Development topics will be generated based on the outcome of the Teacher teams Inquiry, Advance reports and Administrative observations. Strengths  Teacher Teams have been well established and teachers have built strong working relationships. 2018-19 CEP 28   Teachers are supported and encouraged to attend out of the building PD to enhance their craft and turnkey to colleagues.  Teachers reveal 80% feeling of collective responsibility  90% of students and teachers responded positively to cultural awareness and inclusive classroom instruction. Needs Substantial teacher- team time where teachers are meeting consistently to collaborate on focused items.   Professional Development is focused; purposeful, and directed based on teachers' needs.  Substantial monitoring system where teachers and administrators can effectively evaluate the focused work being conducted to make data-driven and informed decisions on next steps for staff and students.  Building on collective responsibility to where there is inter-dependability among staff.  Administration providing teachers with timely feedback based on instructional non-negotiables and learnings from PD using to Danielson Framework to guide the outcome of practice.  Continuous support from Administrators, team leaders, consultants, and peers to provide constructive feed-forward on the practices.  New teacher plan to enhance and maintain the growth and teacher retention.  Monitoring system in place to ensure all teachers are receiving the professional development needed to enhance their craft and students' performance. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 100% of teachers will engage in grade level data inquiry teams in order to analyze a range of sources of data from students and teachers to discern student strengths and challenges, research potential strategies, tailor instruction and identify appropriate RtI resources for all students; including students with disabilities, English as a New Language Learners, and advanced students as measured by the alignment of state exam scores, students' portfolios, common assessments, and Advance reports. 2018-19 CEP 29  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Activities/Strategies Grade Team Leaders will receive in-house training on the process of the Japanese Lesson Study, specifically New teachers. Training will be provided by MSQI coach Megan Kennelly. Team leaders will then be able to facilitate the Inquiry Team meetings during every Monday from 2:20 to 3:00 pm as they focus on best practices and looking at students' work to make changes and adjustments to their teaching. We will be utilizing the Handbook for Professional Learning and the Collaborative Learning through Peer-Intervisitation tools for all Professional Learning (Inquiry) Team meetings. Grade teams will conduct 6-8 weeks cycles of inquiry focusing on implementing specific strategies to address the needs of Students with Disabilities, SWDs, and/or the lowest third. During the teacher visits to each other classrooms, teachers will record low inference notes focused on what students are saying and doing. Teachers will meet on Mondays and share the findings and discuss whether the strategy was successful and impacted students’ learning. The strategies that show and improvement in students’ learning will be shared with the whole staff for implementation. A Professional Development Calendar was developed by Principal and APs using feedback from teachers EOY Glows and Grows comments. Teachers will receive the monthly PD plan so they are aware of the PDs being offered and their expectations. PD Calendar is tentative with modifiable topics. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All teachers September 2018- June 2019 Principal, APs, MSQI Coach, Teacher Team Leaders, MSQI Coach, MSQI Coordinator All teachers September 2018- June 2019 Principal, APs, MSQI coach, All Teachers September 2018- June 2019 Principal, APs, consultants, UFT Center Coach With the continuous growth of the Elementary grades and the addition of new teachers. Teachers are in need of continuous support on curriculum, Instruction, and Assessment. Consultants from last school year were asked to return to conduct PDs in guided reading and support for the implementation of the Expeditionary Learning (EL) curriculum for the 4th grade teachers. Elementary teachers, all grades teachers 3-4, 6-8 grades. September 2018- June 2019 EL consultants: Erin, ELA AP, UFT Center Coach The K-2 Teachers will receive a new Writing curriculum to align with CKLA program. Teachers will receive PD on implementation and on site coaching on delivery of the program. K-2 teachers September 2018- June 2019 Amplify Coach, Elementary AP, Principal, 2018-19 CEP 30  This school year we will continue to focus on the subgroups ELLs and SWDs. Our teachers of ICT and SC classrooms will be receiving PD from the Brooklyn Field Service Center (BFSC). Some teachers will attend PD at the BFSC office and some will receive PD in-house. With this said ENL teachers will be using the "Advanced Literacy Guide for ELLs" provided by the DOE to provide strategic instruction for our ELLs. In addition we have targeted ELLs in 3-4 and LTE of the 6-8 grades to receive extra support in our after school program which will begin in January 2018 through May 2018. ENL teachers, SPED teachers, September 2018- June 2019 All teachers. Instructional Team, UFT Center Coach BFSC consultants, SPED liaison, ENL Coordinator, APs, Principal, UFT Center Coach 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Families will be provided the opportunity to learn about the programs and new curriculum during curriculum night in September, during parent engagement, parent handbook, and grade team events for "parent in the classrooms days." Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Professional development for teachers will occur on Mondays from 2:20 pm to 3:40 pm, where teachers will be working within their collaborative learning teams using the cycle of inquiry to conduct their meetings. from 2:20 to 3:00 pm and then focused PD will be conducted based on need. Teachers will be asked to continue the work of their Teams during their Professional time on Tuesdays from 3:00 to 3:35 and during their weekly grade/department meetings and their preparation periods. Teachers will also be provided the opportunity to meet during lunch and learns or their classes will be covered for them to engage in PD time with their colleagues and consultants. The BFSC will be a resource in providing PDs for our teachers based on need. Teachers inter-visitation to other schools will be arranged in advanced and funding will be set aside to hire substitute teachers. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. The instructional team and teacher teams will conduct quarterly (every marking period) analysis on the report retrieved from Advance on Domain 3 indicators. The results will be shared with the learning teams and revised action plans will be created for the next quarter. Teacher teams will also utilize the protocol for peer inter-visitations and 2018-19 CEP 31  monitor their cycles of inquiry every 6 weeks or at the end of their unit or lesson. All Teacher Teams will analyze their progress based on students’ outcomes and revise their plans based on need. Working with the consultants to assess the curriculum and it's effectiveness using a rubric or looking at student work and how they are meeting the required common core standards. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Teachers will be using the "tuning protocol" to conduct the "Japanese Lesson Study" which will consists of agendas, minutes, and students' work. These items will all be used to measure the this goal quarterly and then comprehensively at the end of the school year June 2018. Program rubrics will be used to measure the effectiveness of the curriculum from the vendor. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 32  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Effective Leadership begins with celebrating the accomplishments, recognizing the gaps, and putting systems in place to address the needs of students. The other elements of the Framework: Rigorous Instruction, Collaborative Teachers, Supportive Environment, and Strong Family-Community Ties all blends into the work of an Effective School Leadership Team. This school year 2017-2018 we have 3 APS, 2 Deans, 2 Guidance Counselors, and a full time Psychologist. Our administrative team is bigger and stronger than it has been and we need to establish systems to ensure effective and timely support is being provided to Students, parents, and teachers. The SQG report 2017 stated that teachers responded 66% positive to having teacher influence in effective school leadership; with the lowest responses being: 1) 46% of teachers reported that they have a moderate to a great deal of influence over school policy in the area of selecting instructional materials use in classrooms. 2) Under program coherence: 54% of teachers agreed or strongly agreed that their school, once they start a new program, they follow up to make sure that it's working. There was 81% positive responses on instructional leadership with the lowest responses: 71% of teachers agreed or strongly agreed that the principal/school leader participates in instructional planning with teams of teachers. 73% of teachers agreed or strongly agreed that the principal/school leader knows what's going on in their classroom 78% of teachers agreed or strongly agreed that the Principal/school leader makes clear to the staff his or her expectations for meeting instructional goals. These two new administrators are former teachers of PS/IS 30. I am a solid believer in promoting teacher leadership. A strength at PS/IS 30 is that we have the answers under our roof and we are beginning to capitalize on our teacher leaders' skills and build capacity in the best interest of our students. This school year we establish instructional non-negotiable for every classroom. The non-negotiable will be rolled out to teachers so they have a common understanding of what effective teaching looks and sounds like which will include a focus on strategies to support students with disabilities and English Language Learners as well as high achieving students. 2018-19 CEP 33  This school year we articulated and substantiated the rationale for professional development decisions. Our targeted group of students are our ELLs, SWDs, and High Achievers, however all students are considered when making these decisions. We are making moves with addressing our the SEL needs of all of our grades K-8 by creating our Student Light House Committee (SLHC) which the Principal will recruit and facilitate. The SLHC will play an integral role in us transitioning from the traditional teacher-led conferences to student-led conferences where students will be able to articulate to their parents and guardians their academic progress and their role and contribution to the school community. District 20 Superintendent Costantino is providing on going professional learning for Principals and APs. The learning time consist of a cohort of principals who will spend time visiting each other schools and observing and sharing best practices. APs also get to follow the same cohort of schools with the schools' APs so they can share best practices. The new APs are provided with learning opportunities from the BFSC. This opportunity provided by the district is important in effective leadership to promote coherency among our schools and district and opportunities staff and administration to improve their craft. An assessment of factors that may attribute to our decline in scores could be: new teachers, an increase in our SWDs population, assimilation to the CCSS; alignment of curriculum, instruction, and assessment. Having data driven assessment systems in place will provide teachers and administrators with clear directions on next steps. Under curriculum; teacher teams have been updating curriculum in Rubicon Atlas in all subjects. We are focused on closely looking at the tasks students are being asked to do in order to master the standards being addressed. Our math and ELA programs are in the 4th year of implementation and teachers are still fine-tuning the performance tasks based on the students’ performance. For the math department the summer 0f 2017 was used to plan the Math curriculum for the 6-8 grades. In ELA we are using Expeditionary Learning for the upper grades and CKLA/Fundations (Core Knowledge Language Arts) for the Elementary grades, the writing strand was purchased for the K-2 Strand to align with CKLA. The Science curriculum is yet to be determined by the State, we are using the NGSS and reviewing various vendors to establish curriculum for students. The Social Studies curriculum has been fully adopted by the school, K-8, all grades are using passports. This school year we will purchase the students' workbooks to ensure all students are provided with the same tasks. Under Instruction; teacher teams will be using the cycles of inquiry through peer inter-visitation to integrate the “thinking routines” into their lessons to determine the impact of implementation of these routines on students’ performance. In the past administrators were the main evaluators in the classroom, with the implementation of the peer inter-visitation, teachers are being supported and collaborating with their peers on best practices to improve students’ performance. Under Assessment: in the past 2 years teachers have been using their own assessments and the assessments from the programs. This school year we will be using common benchmark assessments for across the grades for Math and ELA as well as unit assessments in each core subject. Benchmarks will be scheduled for late November/December 2015 and again late February/March 2016. Unit assessments will be administered at the end of each unit. Department teacher teams will focus on analysis of the data to drive their instruction based on the Standards. Strengths Strong content teachers with strong content knowledge Strong teacher- collaborative community    Additional administrative Team to support teachers and the work o be accomplished 2018-19 CEP 34   District support of Administrative team to enhance support for teachers and staff. Needs  Improve instructional leadership: increase opportunities for classroom observations formal and informal; non-evaluative supportive coaching  Effective use of the Advance reports to effectively monitor and revise instructional goals that is focused on teacher and student outcomes.  Providing appropriate and effective support to Administrators to lead their Teams and the goals to demonstrate meaningful impact on teacher and students’ outcomes.  New Administrative Team who need continued professional development in Advance.  Continuous monitoring of assessments.  Monitoring of curriculum implementation and impact on student learning.  Professional development on Data Driven Instruction. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, PS/IS 30 the Principal and Administrative staff will provide 100% of teachers and classroom staff, including paraprofessionals, with purposeful and targeted professional development to build horizontal and vertical coherent instructional practices to improve achievement for all students; including English as a New Language Learners, students with disabilities, and advanced students as measured by increases of at least 3% on the 2019 state ELA and Math exams. 2018-19 CEP 35  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Principal, TDEC (advance support) William Kirk from Superintendent's office. Principal cohort Team colleagues We will be using excerpts from various text during our cabinet meeting to ensure that that the work laid out in the 3 goals are being achieved. We will be using several text: to tier our teachers in order to guide customize PD we will use Building Teachers' Capacity for Success, by Pete Hall an Alisa Simeral. Administrators, Instructional Team, Team leaders September 2018- June 2019 Hall and Simeral will provide Administrative with the format for identifying our teachers and providing them with specific support as they hone in on their craft. Another text, "Leader of their Own Learning" by Ron Berger will be the our anchor text from which we will be addressing our school wide initiatives and goals. Beginning with Student led conferences. Research shows that teachers’ are more willing and able to improve their instructional practices when they are engaged in content coaching sessions. Plan will ensure that monitoring and revision of systems are occurring. Principal will organize systems and communicate expectations to all stakeholders. Principal will meet with cabinet every Monday morning and Friday evening to monitor and review weekly expectations. Principal will conduct monthly meetings with Instructional team leads and SAT to ensure RTI systems are in place and protocols are being monitored and followed accordingly. Principal will review APs and coaches schedules and conduct weekly meetings to monitor. Principal and APs will communicate weekly with supervised staff to review and update items of focused goals. Administrators and coaches of all departments will be involved in the coaching sessions to ensure impact on all staff and students. Administrators and coaches September 2018- June 2019 Principal 2018-19 CEP 36 Principal and APS will be conducting a cycle of inquiry on a target group of students to measure effective implementation of items of the goals based on students’ outcomes. Focused and purposeful agendas during SLT to create a sense of urgency and a culture of sustainable collective responsibility. Parents The implementation of SAM sponsored by MSQI task force has been an instrumental tool for the Principal in achieving instructional goals. This year I have increased my instructional goal to 60% of which I should be spending my time on instructional items and not managerial items. Principal September 2018- June 2019 September 2018- June 2019 Principal SAMs (Michele Delaney, Calliope Athanasakos) 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Shared decision making will occur during SLT. Members of the SLT will provide opportunities to share discussions with stakeholders and receive feedback on decisions. Workshops for parents and guardians will be provided to guide parents through this work. Parents will have the opportunity to ask questions and voice concerns. Guidance counselors and parent coordinators will be instrumental in providing the information to parents and addressing needs. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Appropriate time management and staying focused on the goals are the ultimate resources of this goal. SAM implementation will provide assistance in time management to increase Principal's time focused on instructional tasks and items. Use of Advance reports will monitor observations and ensure that instructional goals and items are being addressed by APs and teachers are being supported in their varying areas of need. Funds will be allocated for MSQI affiliation, consultants and other items needed. Per session will be allocated from funding for after/before school for supplemental tasks needed to accomplish goals. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. This goal is about improving progress monitoring. We will conduct comprehensive progress evaluation every marking period or cycle of observations. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. 2018-19 CEP 37  Advance reports. Curriculum rubrics, Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 38  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. We met our goal last school year according to SQG 2017. In all the categories we are 90% and more of positive responses. However, our PTA numbers are still low and not a lot of parents are getting involved in the PTA events. This continues to be a struggle. We are growing our Elementary grades as we expand to K-8. With this said every year will be adding on an elementary grade until we are at full K-8 in 2018-19. With each new grade come new challenges and learnings within the culture of the school. The work of the SLT and the PTA is to find ways to bridge the gap between these 2 cultures into one cohesive unit. Building school wide communication among ourselves and with our families is one of our focus this school year. PTA established a website where all stakeholders can share school events and provide information to our families. We have established annual events that will be improve parental involvement and engagement at PTA meetings and the everyday education of our students. This continues to be a challenge. This school year 2017-2018 the Annex is at full capacity with the K-2 population. Our SLT and PTA will be working in tandem to ensure that we maintain the culture even though we are in different buildings. Implementing the Leaders in Me process will provide this consistent thread of expectations for all stakeholders in maintaining the cohesive culture. During our SLT meetings parents also discussed the need to improve PTA attendance and overall parental engagement. Strengths ● Strong PTA and SLT who are engaged and involved in decisions ● Parents who are willing to volunteer time into their children’s education. ● Open door policy, where parents are comfortable to discuss ideas and make suggestions on how to improve students’ performance and well being. ● Partnering with Community Based Organization, NIA to enhance our students performance and provide enriching extracurricular activities to develop the well-rounded student. Needs ● Improve parental engagement for our middle school ● Provide families with engaging activities and events to celebrate their children’s learning. 2018-19 CEP 39  ● Provide families with events to support their own personal needs to improve their lives. ● Provide opportunities for families to support their children at home Provide opportunities to support families academically and socially as a community. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, PS/IS 30 will increase family and community involvement in activities and events by 25%. This will be measured by using the school's learning survey (SQG) for 2018-2019. 2018-19 CEP 40  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? ● Our Parents Teachers Association will survey parents to get information about interests and needs of our school community. All PS/IS 30 stakeholders PTA, SLT, PC. September 2018- June 2019 ● Regular Parent Teachers Association Meetings: Our Parents’ Association meets regularly (usually once per month, but more if need be.) These meetings often cover topics that have been shown to be of particular interest to the families of our students. The times of these meetings are also flexible in order to ensure the greatest number of parent attendance as possible. This school year we will attempt to conduct meetings in the mornings. ● Saturday Academy for Parents: Our school, along with the PTA, will work to develop a Saturday Academy program specifically for parents. The program will be held on a series of consecutive Saturdays and will be open to all parents in the PS/IS 30 Community. The focus will be to teach parents how to work with their children at home on a variety of topics, and offer parents other self-help focus as needed. ● Information Workshops for Parents: We will ensure that our parents have all of the support and resources they need to work most effectively with and for their children. Some of the topics may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability grade-level curriculum and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home. ● Parental Involvement: We will work on increasing the number of parents volunteers at our school to decrease incidents during lunch and recess are parents help our students while eating as well as playing. ● Continue to communicate with parents via : Our school website 2018-19 CEP 41 Pupil path application Providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; Developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. We have been in partnership with NIA for the past 5 years. It has been a part of our MSQI Extra initiative. We have since morphed into a program for the Elementary grades, however it's a fee for service program. NIA have worked with PS/IS 30 to offer the parents vouchers where the fee is reduced to half and some students even are provided with free after-school program based on the grants NIA receives from local council. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. The PTA will be funding and or planning the majority of the activities and events. For the Saturday academy the Principal will allocate funding for supervision during these activities. NIA funds Elementary program. ExpandEd and MSQI offices via the DOE. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA Title II, Part A SIG X PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. During quarterly executive board meetings the PTA and the Principal will conduct and evaluation of the attendance and the outcomes of the activities being conducted to review and revise as needed. Skedula, pupil path, iO Insight will be the system used to monitor grading of students, teachers assessments, and behavioral anecdotal. This will be monitored quarterly by administrators and GCs to ensure students are receiving the appropriate interventions based on need. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Agendas and sign-in sheets. iO Insights, Advance reports, Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 42  2018-19 CEP 43  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Use of the State's recommended cut scores for Math and ELA. DRP results in September 2017. Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Middle school quality initiative: Strategic reading periods during the school week 3x per week. Teacher initial referral after conducting the RTI protocol. Continuing AIS for other 2 days as needed by coach or AIS teacher. Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) Small group When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) During the school day 3x per week, and after school. Mathematics Use of State's recommended cut scores for math. In addition: Ed-Performance assessment results in 2017. Teacher referral after conducting the RTI protocol. Science Teacher referral after conducting the RTI protocol Secondary diagnostics based on DRP scores. Middle school quality initiative: Strategic reading periods during the school week 3x per week. Continuing AIS for other 2 days as needed by coach or AIS teacher. Secondary diagnostics based on resultsor iXL, pre and post unit assessments. Teacher created and iLearn Small group During the school day 3x per week, and after school. Small group After school 2018-19 CEP 44  Social Studies At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Teacher referral after conducting the RTI protocol Teacher referral after conducting the RTI protocol. Teacher created and iLearn Small group After school As required and needed. Small group or one to one. During the school day. 2018-19 CEP 45  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 7 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. We have allocated the required funds for each student. We have reached out to the parents and/or guardians to inform them of the assistance we can provide. We were planning to provide educational resources and materials when needed and school uniform purchase, if needed. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). 7 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 CEP 46 The set-asides have been allocated based on the required amount per student. Parents and guardians were informed on of the assistance if needed. We have purchased educational materials and supplies for all students identified. School uniforms will also be purchased if needed. 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. N/A 2018-19 CEP 47  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. 1. The Principal will work closely with the BFSC HR point to ensure that non-HQT meet all required documentation and assessment deadlines. 2. Mentors are assigned to support new teachers. Principal has created an additional "New Teacher Academy" monthly meeting with 0-2 year teachers for PD and addressing needs. 3. Teachers are provided with continuous support and shared resources on best practices using the DOE website and the wealth of information available to educators. 4. Creating ILT and SIT where teachers are teaching each other on best practices creates a cohesive professional culture where new teachers have the opportunity to be open to their colleagues with the fear of failing or feeling unsuccessful. 5. Addition of an AP who is not only sharing literacy teachings with ELA teachers, but with content area teachers well, creating a professional learning community where teachers feel comfortable sharing their lesson planning and their classrooms with each other. 6. Principal encourages teachers to subscribe to professional associations and also funds some, for teachers to stay current on the rolling out of the common core within each subject. 7. Principal provides opportunities for all teachers to experience and visit other schools and teachers to observe and share best practices. 8. Providing consultants when available to Math and ELA teachers for on site coaching, creating labsites for teachers to learn from and with each other. Implementing Teacher-Teams with a teacher as the Lead empowering teachers to assist each other as they implement school goals and CCLS. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development 2018-19 CEP 48  Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). 1. Teachers are provided with continuous support and shared resources on best practices using the DOE website and the wealth of information available to educators. 2. Creating ILT and SIT where teachers are teaching each other on best practices creates a cohesive professional culture where new teachers have the opportunity to be open to their colleagues with the fear of failing or feeling unsuccessful. 3. Addition of an Assistant Principal coach who is not only sharing literacy teachings with ELA teachers, but with content area teachers well, creating a professional learning community where teachers feel comfortable sharing their lesson planning and their classrooms with each other. 4. Principal encourages teachers to subscribe to professional associations and also funds some, for teachers to stay current on the rolling out of the common core within each subject. 5. Principal provides opportunities for all teachers to experience and visit other schools and teachers to observe and share best practices. 6. Principal provides the opportunity for teachers to meet by grades and departments weekly to modify and adjust curriculum based on the CCLS instructional shifts. 7. Providing opportunities for Math teachers to join the Algebra for ALL initiative in NYCDOE, Monthly meetings with the DOE personnel, facilitated by well renowned Math educators. Implementing Teacher-Teams with a teacher as the Lead empowering teachers to assist each other as they implement school goals and CCLS. Teachers are provided with continuous support and shared resources on best practices using the DOE website and the wealth of information available to educators. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) 2018-19 CEP 49  Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). As a K-8 program we will offer our incoming Kindergarten parents an early orientation opportunity where they will receive information on the academic expectations and the services we provide at PS/IS 30. Our parents will get an opportunity to see a class in session, speak to current Kindergarten parents, and ask questions. The first month of school all Kindergarteners will receive reading and math assessment to determine their academic status. Teachers will make appropriate adjustments to their lesson plans to meet the needs of all students. Supplemental services will be provided for students before and/or after the regular school day to ensure that students are prepared for the next grade. Parents will be consistently provided with information on students’ progress and how they can assist their child at home to support what teachers are doing in school. 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. The Principal chose the curriculum programs based on the growing grades to ensure consistency and alignment within the curriculum and the rigor of the instructional expectations. Teachers were provided with training over the summer and during the school year on new programs (such as Expeditionary Learning, EL) for the 3rd graders AND 4th grades. Teachers collaborate weekly on curriculum modification and sharing of lesson plans led by the Grade-Team leader. Teachers are given the autonomy to use the assessments provided in the program or to create common assessments across the grades. The Assistant Principals provide teacher support and guidance on teachers’ needs and required materials for all assessments administered in the classroom. In addition to teacher-created assessments we administer benchmark assessments twice a year, diagnostic assessments in the beginning and the end of the school year, and the MOSLs for teachers’ evaluations. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) X Column B Section Reference(s) 5a, 5b, 5c, 5d Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Federal Federal 625,962 0 2018-19 CEP 50  X X 5a, 5b, 5c, 5d 5a, 5b, 5c, 5d, 5e Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Local 0 25,038 5,798,949 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the 2018-19 CEP 51  participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 CEP 52  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. Mary White Ovington PS/IS 30, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students Mary White Ovington PS/IS 30 will support parents and families of Title I students by: ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; 2018-19 CEP 53  ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; The school’s Parent Involvement Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; 2018-19 CEP 54  ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the ESSA; ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) School-Parent Compact (SPC) Mary White Ovington, PS/IS 30, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student 2018-19 CEP 55  achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; 2018-19 CEP 56  ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities 2018-19 CEP 57  ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; 2018-19 CEP 58  ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 2018-19 CEP 59  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 2018-19 CEP 60  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: This year 2018-19 we are continuing with our focus on ELLS and SWDs and ensuring that these students have full access to the curriculum in every classroom and are provided with Tier II and Tier III interventions as needed. With that said we are focused on ensuring the majority of our students' needs are met during Tier I core Instruction. As we are full K-8 this year, the data below shows that we have 22% ELLs in our building with the majority of our ELLs in our 3-5 grades band. The data table also shows the majority of our developing ELLs, and ELLs with IEPs and expanding ELLs are also in the 3-5 grades band. This is a major concern as these students are preparing to enter the middle school grades where the content becomes more rigorous and demanding. The table also shows a the majority of our LTE are in our middle school grades and also with mostly at expanding proficiency. The direct instruction supplemental program will be two fold for our ELLs this year: 1) For the student subgroups in grades 3-8 ESL and content (ELA and Math) teachers will be working side by side to provide small group targeted instruction based on students' needs. All students will be given a diagnostic in ELA and Math to determine where they are, ESL teachers will be focused on Advanced Literacy Skills using iReady online and hard copy texts for Math and ELA. 2) For the This 3rd graders taking the NYS assessments and we have identified some students, specifically our ELLs who need the extra support. The data table below shows we have 25 second graders and 21 third graders who are Expanding. For the majority of these students who went from transitioning to Expanding, the improvement is in their reading scores, however their writing scores are still averaging between 5-10 points. These are the students we have decided to extend and invitation to an after school program to focus on writing skills. We have also recognized our long term ELLs in grades 6-8, there are 23 of them and the average score in their writing modality is between 4-9. We will be inviting these students together with the the expanding students in grades 6-8. An improvement in writing means an improvement in vocabulary acquisition. This school year the supplemental funds of the Title III LEP will be used to: 1) Provide extra ENL, Math and ELA support to our Elementary ELL students who are identified as at risk in grades 2 and 3 and our 6-8 LTEs in an after school program on Wednesdays and Thursdays. 2) Purchase supplemental instructional materials: Wordly Wise 3000 for grade 2-8; iReady texts for Math 3) Conduct a study group around the document, "Leading Advanced Literacy Instruction to promote ELL's Achievement" provided by the Department of Education. All teachers of ELL's will dig deeply into the document and visit the "Hallmarks". 20K030 ELL DATA 2017-2018 LTE Dev ELLs K 5 2018-19 CEP 61  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information 0 0 0 0 0 3 3 2 8 15 0 0 4 2 6 14 15 0 25 5 1 5 8 22 0 25 2 2 8 12 1 13 0 2 6 11 8 5 0 2 5 9 5 0 14 27 62 113 51 68 2018-19 CEP 62  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The after school program will begin in January 2016 through May 2016 and the targeted ELLs in grades 2 and 3 will be invited to participate and the LTEs in grades 6-8. We have approximately 40 ELLs in these 2 grades and 23 LTEs in grades 6-8. The After school program will be for 3 hours per week for direct instruction and an additional 30 minutes per week for teachers to meet to discuss and plan for the two days using the . where students will be receiving assistance in Math, ELA, and ENL for approximately 45 minutes in each content per day. There are two groups of students the ENL teacher will be pushing in with each group for 45 minutes in each session for each subject. The afternoon session will begin at 2:30 pm and end at 4:00 pm. The students will be broken up in 2 groups and they will switch between the teachers who will consist of a Math, ELA, and an ENL teacher. Teachers will be using iReady texts Math and Wordly Wise 3000 for ELA/ENL. The after school program will provide students with that one on one time needed for them to successfully access and support the curriculum during the regular school day. Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: Our focused subgroup for this school year are ELLs and SWDs. PD for our after school teachers will be an additional 30 minutes on Thursdays at the end of the students' sessions to assess students' work and plan for the next week. Teachers will be using the document "Leading Advanced Literacy Instruction to Promote ELLs Achievement" which specifically provides "Hallmarks"- a common set of instructional practices in all classrooms which can lead to growth in the language and literacy skills of ELLs. This document will be presented as a resource to be used when making instructional moves in addressing the needs of the targeted ELLs. Teachers will have the opportunity to dig deep into the students' work products and adjust their instructional moves. The advantage for the selected students for the after school program will be their data from their classroom performance using the "hallmarks" will be readily available for the teachers in the after school program and their needs can be individually addressed. The Hallmarks will be the focused topics which include:1) How and why to use Engaging text for ELLs; 2) How to develop language skills and build both conversational and academic language and knowledge; 3) How to write to build language and knowledge; and 4) How to teach high-utility vocabulary words to build breadth and depth of knowledge. the facilitators of this work will be the Assistant Principals of ELA, and Elementary grades in collaboration with Laura Jackson, Teacher Development Coach and Laura Kelly, ENL Coordinator. Schedule for PD for teachers for the after school will begin on Wednesday, January 4, 2017 then on Thursdays beginning January 12, 19, 26. February 2, 9, 16. March 2, 9, 23, and April 6, 20, 27. Professional development will be led by Principal, TDC Coach, and/or APs for 30 minutes. In January teachers will conduct a needs assessment on the students in order to provide them with a more targeted instruction and meet students where they are in the writing process. 2018-19 CEP 63  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: We have and will continue to provide our parents with translated materials in all notices that are bag-packed home. We have added an Arabic speaking Community Associate to our staff to better address our parents needs and concerns. During our meetings PTA, Parent/teachers conferences and any other school-wide events parents receive message via email, phone messaging and written with all communication in the home language. We have strategically hired staff based on the needs of the community so as to bridge the communication gap between home and school. Our materials are translated by staff who are compensated for the work they do. Workshops for parents of ELLs will occur during parent engagement time on Tuesdays facilitated by ENL teachers one Tuesday a month. Parents will also be provided with workshops during PTA meetings, once a month, facilitated by staff. Specific topics parents have requested: 1) How can I assist my child at home? 2) Adult ESL classes 3) Online resources for students and parents. 4) Basic computer skills to access information. Each grade will prepare a workshop for parents in various languages for Math and ELA and provide parents with resources and information on how they can assist their children at home. Parent engagement for all students is very active at no cost to Title III funding. Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits)  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental. Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. 2018-19 CEP 64  Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL 2018-19 CEP 65  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 20 School Name Mary White Ovington PS/IS 30 Borough Brooklyn School Number 030 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Carol Heeraman Coach ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Laura Kelly/Mohamad Salama/ Teacher/Subject Area Nadine Mastrogiacomo/math Teacher/Subject Area Mary Grace Owusu/science Related-Service Provider Allison Kaplon Superintendent Karina Costantino Assistant Principal Calliope Athanasakos Coach type here School Counselor Audra Allen Parent Elma Atmani Parent Coordinator Donna Moscatello Field Support Center Staff Member Aaron Perez Other (Name and Title) Liza Lloyd SPED Liason C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 4 0 1 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 6 2 7 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 1 1 D. Student Demographics 2018-19 CEP 66  Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 1010 Total number of ELLs 250 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 24.75% Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): Chinese If yes, indicate language(s): Arabic Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 1 2 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 1 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 2 0 0 6 0 0 8 4 K 1 1 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 1 1 1 1 2 3 1 1 2 1 1 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? For our K-2 grades our teachers preliminarily use the NYSITELL to assess appropriate incoming students. Fountas and Pinnell reading assessments are also used to gauge students' literacy development. For our bilingual classes teachers use teacher-created assessments with the ENLs. The assessments data provide our teachers with information used to guide preparation of lesson plans and differentiated student tasks based on the learning targets. The NYSISTELL and the NYSESLAT data also provide information on how ENLs perform on the specific modalities. We use the data from the the City and State exams to align our curriculum units with the needs of our students. The data also provides us with information on the amount of instructional services each ENL requires based on Part 154. We are particularly aware of the new requirements and are setting teacher programs to align with these mandates. This year PS/IS 30 is using the results from the 2014-15 NYSESLAT, the NYSITELL, the Item Skills Analysis from the ELA state 2018-19 CEP 67  exams, and the baseline MOSLs to determine the literacy skills of our current students. In addition, the content teachers are reflecting on the MOSLs to assess early literacy skill of the ENLS they are teaching. The Kindergarten ENLs will be given the DRA to determine the literacy skills in addition to the teachers using the results of the MOSLs. The data allows us to target specific literacy standards in reading and writing where teachers of ENLs are able to plan and prepare by scaffolding tasks and lessons to ensure that the ENLs have multiple entry points for meeting the learning targets. The use of the data and what our teachers are doing is aligned to our instructional plan which is integrating literacy in all subjects. Teachers are using their collaborative time to ensure coherency in literacy skills. Students will able to see and make the literacy connections within the subjects. In about 80 percent of our classrooms teachers are specifically teaching Tier II and III vocabulary using specific strategies, which is posted in the classrooms. In about 80 percent of the classrooms teachers have sentence and statement prompts for students to use when responding to each other and writing. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? We evaluate the program according to the data from the school report card, the results from the Standardized tests, and the Progress report. In addition, we will examine the success of the program by using the data from our interim reports and our students' performance on their report cards. Evaluation of the program will also be determined by the ENL, BL, and DL teachers and their feed-forward of how beneficial the particular program is to the students. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] We initiated a kindergarten grade with the intention to gradually expand to grade 5. Therefore, presently we are serving ENLs in the kindergarten, 1 st and 2 nd grade through our Transtional Bilingual Education Program in Chinese/English, Dual Language Program Arabic/English, and the stand alone ESL Program. These ENLs in grade K have been assessed with the NYSISTELL and with a series informal classroom assessments that guide the instruction in the classrrom. In addition, the results of the MOSL have been used to guide instruction. We are supporting ENLs enhanced academic outcomes by: Fostering Basic Interpersonal 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. Throughtout the years since the implementation of the CCLS, we have noticed the increased number of long term ELLs in the upper grades. Additionally, some of our 8 th graders are going into HS still as ENLs. Of the 63 ENLs in Kindergarten 45 of them are at the entering English proficiency level, of which 28 of them are in a bilingual program; the other ENLs are in expanding, based on the NYSITELL and are in one of the 3 programs offered at PS/IS 30. All the students in the 6-8 grades are in a stand alone ENL program where ENL teachers are pushing in to either ELA, Science, SS and/or WIN classrooms. In the current 6th grade there 20 ENLs: 12 Expanding, 3 emerging/transitioning level, and 5 entering. The data shows that 8 of the 6th grade ENLs showed improvement on the NYSESLAT; of the 12 Expanding ENLs, 6 of them went down in the raw score within that proficiency in various modalities especially reading and writing. There are 9 ENLs in our 7th grade, 6 are Expanding, 1 transitioning, and 2 entering. Of the 6 expanding ENLs, 5 of them decreased within the proficiency level and the majority of the ENLs scored a level 1 on the ELA state exams. There are 18 ENLs in the 8th grade; of which there are 7 expanding, 6 emerging/transitioning , and 7 entering. The expectations of the Common Core Standands in the NYSESLAT test and the ELA exams had an impact on the students scores and we now have a clearer picture of where our students are based and what their current needs are. 2018-19 CEP 68  7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. Freestanding ENL programs are homogeneously grouped by grade and proficiency level. For the integrated portion of service an ENL certified teacher and a content area teacher deliver instruction. For stand alone service an certifed ENL teacher delivers instruction. b. TBE program. If applicable. The TBE class is heterogeneoulsy grouped. In the TBE program Science and Social Studies are provided in the students' native language by a certified Bilingual teacher. All other content areas are instructed in English. The mandated ENL services are provided bythe certified Bilingual classroom teacher. c. DL program. If applicable. For the Dual Language students, 50% of their instruction is in Arabic. They are instructed in Arabic in Math, Science, and Arabic Language Arts. The remaining 50% of their instruction is in English. They are instructed in English in Social Studies and ELA. For their mandated ENL instruction, the students are grouped according to their proficiency level, and receive their instruction in the Integrated model and/ or, the Stand Alone model as prescribed by the the Chancellor's Regulations. 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? The NYSESLAT proficiency levels are reviewed for each child. The units of study and how they are delivered are determined by the mandated CR Part 154 -2. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. Our Arabic Dual Language Program includes an ENL component designed to develop skills in listening, speaking, reading, and writing in English All content-area courses/subjects are taught in the home language and English A home language arts component is designed to develop skills in listening, speaking, reading, and writing in the students’ home language while cultivating an appreciation of their history and culture 50% of the students are ELLs of the same home language; 50% of the students are not ELLs (former ELLs or never ELLs) Our transitional Chinese bilingual education program includes the following an ENL component designed to develop skills in listening, speaking, reading, and writing in English 2 content-area courses that are taught in the home language and English at the entering and emerging levels a home language arts component designed to develop skills in listening, speaking, reading, and writing in the students’ home language while cultivating an appreciation of their history and culture all of the students in a TBE program share the same home language 2018-19 CEP 69  Stand-alone ENL is instruction is provided to develop English language skills so that students can succeed in core content courses. It is delivered by a certified ENL teacher. A student may not receive stand-alone ENL in lieu of core content area instruction. Integrated ENL instruction is used to build English language skills through content area instruction. It is delivered by a dually certified teacher (ENL and a content area) or co-teaching by a certified ENL teacher and a certified content area teacher (i.e., English language arts, math, science, or social studies). Both methods of integrated ENL instruction include content area subject matter and English language development using ENL strategies. All ELLs and former ELLs up to 2 years after exiting ELL status must receive a minimum number of units of integrated ENL. At the secondary level, ENL is often departmentalized; however, at the elementary level, ENL is delivered in the following 2 ways: The push-in model: an ENL teacher works with ELLs in collaboration with general education classroom teachers to provide language acquisition and vocabulary support. There is a common preparation time between the 2 teachers and/or prior collaborative lesson planning. The pull-out model: ELLs who spend the majority of their day in all-English content instruction are brought together from various classes for English-acquisition-focused instruction. ENL teachers need to plan carefully with general education teachers to ensure curricular alignment and continuity of instruction. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? To ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their native language, standards based instruction is provided in the native language and in English for the duration of students' education in Transitional Bilingual Education. Literacy instruction is consistent with the program model design. All classrooms have genre-based libraries in English and support material in the native language; including but not limited to fiction and nonfiction texts, bilingual glossaries and dictionaries. Students have easy access to reading material in English and in the native language and teachers are supported and encouraged to develop native language proficiency as well as academic English skills. ELLs are also provided with bilingual glossaries and dictionaries for state examTo ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their native language, standards based instruction is provided in the native language and in English for the duration of students' education in Transitional Bilingual Education. Literacy instruction is consistent with the program model design. All classrooms have genre-based libraries in English and support material in the native language; including but not limited to fiction and nonfiction texts, bilingual glossaries and dictionaries. Students have easy access to reading material in English and in the native language and teachers are supported and encouraged to develop native language proficiency as well as academic English skills. ELLs are also provided with bilingual glossaries and dictionaries for state examaste response to question here: 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status Teachers at PS/IS 30 differentiate instruction for ENL subgroups by implementing numerous strategies including but not limited to; building prior knowledge, integrating opportunities to use oral and written language for learning purposes, scaffolding to provide multiple entry points, collaborative grouping through partnerships and group activities, writing and literature response groups, informal assessments, writing reports, and sharing projects to promote English language, literacy and content knowledge development. Teachers maintain high expectations for all ENLs by providing standards based instruction while tailoring instruction to meet individual student needs. They use multiple modes of assessing learning including careful observations of students while students complete performance-based tasks, portfolio entries, learner self assessments and testing accommodations for formal standardized tests. They provide students with access to common core curriculum, facilitate English language development and afford students opportunities for social integration into their multicultural classrooms by offering comprehensible input for language acquisition. Teachers of ENLs make their context-embedded instructional talk more understandable by speaking clearly, repeating key points, defining essential vocabulary in context, and pairing talk with non- verbal communication cues such as pictures, audiovisual clips, graphs, objects and gestures. 2018-19 CEP 70  In addition, teachers are aware and specifically develop appropriate language, content and social/affective objectives including a low-anxiety environment to promote language acquisition and content knowledge. In addition to these methods of differentiation, we employ a number of other techniques to provide multiple entry points for all ELLs. a. Our SIFE students participate in extended day, as well as small group instruction during the school day based on need. b. Our plan for newcomer ELLs includes access to extracurricular programs (funded by Title III funds) programs). Most of our newcomer students participate in extended day, as well as, small group instruction during the school day based on need. c. Our plan for our developing ENLs include access to extracurricular programs (funded by Title III funds). Long term ENLs are placed in an appropriate class setting based on their ELA and NYSESLAT levels, as well as other individual needs they may have (ie, students with disabilities, students in superintendents classes, etc. Other students are supported within their content area classes by an ENL teacher. Many of our long term ENLs also participate in extended day. Based on need, long term ELLs also receive small group instruction and/or AIS services during the school day. d. Our plan for long term ELLs (6+ years) includes access to extracurricular programs (funded by Title III funds). Long term ENLs are placed in an appropriate class setting based on their ELA and NYSESLAT levels, as well as other individual needs they may have (ie, students with disabilities, students in superintendent classes, etc. Many of our long term ENLs also participate in extended day. Based on need, long term ENLs also receive small group instruction and/or AIS services during the school day. e. Former ENLs (1 to 2 years after testing proficient) are also invited to participate in extracurricular programs created for the Teachers at PS/IS 30 differentiate instruction for ENL subgroups by implementing numerous strategies to including but not limited to; building prior knowledge, integrating opportunities to use oral and written language for learning purposes, scaffolding to provide multiple entry points, collaborative grouping through partnerships and group activities, writing and literature response groups, informal assessments, writing reports, and sharing projects to promote English language, literacy and content knowledge development. Teachers maintain high expectations for all ENLs by providing standards based instruction while tailoring instruction to meet individual student needs. They use multiple modes of assessing learning including careful observations of students while students complete performance-based tasks, portfolio entries, learner self assessments and testing accommodations for formal standardized tests. They provide students with access to common core curriculum, facilitate English language development and afford students opportunities for social integration into their multicultural classrooms by offering comprehensible input for language acquisition. Teachers of ENLs make their context-embedded instructional talk more understandable by speaking clearly, repeating key points, defining essential vocabulary in context, and pairing talk with non verbal communication cues such as pictures, audiovisual clips, graphs, objects and gestures. In addition, teachers are aware and specifically develop appropriate language, content and social/affective objectives including a low-anxiety environment to promote language acquisition and content knowledge. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? An IEP team consisting of a special education teacher, a general education teacher, the school psychologist, the ENL coordinator and the special education liason ensure that ENL-SWD receive their mandated services and that their programs reflect the appropriate hours of ENL. Our ENL teachers push in to our content classes to ensure all ENL students receive the proper support required. Our teachers at PS/IS 30 support students language, literacy and content learning by implementing numerous strategies and instructional methods including but not limited to: building academic language, integrating opportunities to use oral and written language for learning purposes, scaffolding for support, targeted grouping strategies, targeted formative and summative assessments, writing projects, and sharing projects to promote English language, literacy and content knowledge development. Teachers maintain high expectations for ENLs by providing standards based instruction while tailoring instruction to meet individual student needs. They use multiple modes of assessing learning including careful observations of students, performance-based portfolio entries, learner self assessments and testing accommodations for formal standardized tests. They provide students with access to common core curriculum facilitate English language development and afford students opportunities for social integration into their multicultural classrooms by offering comprehensible input for language acquisition. Teachers of ENLs make their context-embedded instructional talk more understandable by speaking clearly, repeating key points, defining essential vocabulary in context, and pairing talk with non verbal communication cues such as pictures, graphs, objects and gestures. In addition, teachers are aware and specifically develop appropriate language, content and social/affective objectives including a low-anxiety environment to promote 2018-19 CEP 71  language acquisition and content knowledge. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? Our school looks closely at individual student needs and learning styles by analyzing past student portfolios, teacher anecdotal and test scores to assess appropriate interventions. We have developed an Inquiry Team and Professional learning communities (PLC) to examine trends and establish suitable learning environments. Teachers, administrators and support staff convene regularly for professional development, to discuss students individual educational plans, to fine-tune schedules if needed, and to address the complex composition of our schools population. Students with disabilities whose IEP recommend ENL services are programmed to receive ENL instruction as per CR-Part 154. The frequency of instruction has been determined by their English language acquisition and NYSESLAT score. Students are motivated and supported through a strong school–to-home connection. Students with Disabilities and ENLs are strongly encouraged to participate in our extended day programs. Students who have been designated at risk receive focused attention and are offered a variety of interventions in an effort to prevent being referred to a committee on special education including but not limited to: Individual and group counseling, parent and school based support team conference, guidance intervention, at risk SETSS special education teacher support service recommendation for 6-8 weeks prior to a formal recommendation for special education services Students who are offered the above mentioned interventions and are still recommended for special education services obtain the school psychologists’ evaluation, receive a recommendation based on a school team comprised of a psychologist, social worker, mainstream teacher, and a special education teacher’s observations and analysis. Parents are invited to the meetings and are given an opportunity to view the recommended learning environment. Students are always placed in the least restrictive environment initially and are monitored periodically to ensure proper placement. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. We have provided academic intervention programs which specifically target the ENL students in the bottom third of our student population. These programs target ELA and Math skills. These programs are delivered in English. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? All students in non-superintendent classes are scheduled for an intervention program during the school day. During this school year a particular emphasis is being placed upon grouping ENL students of similiar ability in these small group instructional periods. "WIN" (what I need) instructors will have the opportunity to utilize materials specifically designed for ENL students. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? There are no programs or services being discontinued for ENL students. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. All students are invited to particpate in extra-curricula activites. PS/IS 30 is partnered with MSQI and NIA. Through these partners hips students in 6 th , 7 th and 8 th grade are offered a free after-school program from their 2:20 dismissal time until 5:00PM. Students and their families, as well as, their teachers have input into the programs children participate in. Course selections offer a variety of opportunities for students to grow acadmically and socially. ENL students are also invited to a Saturday Academy that develops skills necessary for successful performance on the NYSESLAT as well as content area of studies. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. ENLs have access to laptops and Ipads inmany of their classes. They are engaged in project based learning activities requiring the use of computers throughout the curriculum units. Smartboards are installed in classrooms giving students the ability to interact in the lesson. Our school has a strong technology program to support language acquisition for our ENL population. 2018-19 CEP 72  Students use various web based program that use differentiated non-fiction readings to boosts ENLs reading comprehension, fluency, and writing skill. using iPads and Macbooks in the classroom to promote language acquisition. We are exploring best practices through the use of these technologies. Our school is a STEAM school that encourages all students to develop a love and interest in technology , science and the arts. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? TBE Model: Native language support is delivered during the mandated Native Language Arts instruction. The instruction is delivered in Chinese. Students follow the literacy curriculum as mandated by the New York State Education department. The Native Language Arts classroom contains a classroom library in the native language. Certified Bilingual teachers deliver instruction in Math, Science, and Social studies. Students receive the mandated number of periods in NLA. ENL Model: All teachers of students in the Freestanding ESL program have received ExC-ELL (Expediting Comprehension for English Language Learners)strategies during professional development sessions provided by educational consultants of Dr. Margarita Calderon. Bilingual Dictionaries and Glossaries are used to support the native language well as I-Pads with translations applications We have recently won a grant which allowed us to stock our school library with an impressive collection of books in a vareity of Native Languages. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. We have ensured that the required services support and resources are aligned with the student’s age, grade level and proficiency levels by adopting a robust curriculum (EL) that is unpacked by a grade team on an ongoing basis. Our grade teams meet and plan weekly during a common planning period and after school for a total of 3 weekly hours in a professional learning community. The goals of the teams include but are not limited to enriching the curriculum by adding relevent and appropriately motivating resources to assist students in understanding, and making meaning out of the texts. Teachers are diligent in making sure students are properly mastering the skills of reading, writing, speaking and listening. They are sensitive to the students cultural background and age and modify material as agreed upon by the team. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? ENLs have access to laptops and Ipads inmany of their classes. They are engaged in project based learning activities requiring the use of computers throughout the curriculum units. Smartboards are installed in classrooms giving students the ability to interact in the lesson. Our school has a strong technology program to support language acquisition for our ENL population. Students use various web based program that use differentiated non-fiction readings to boosts ENLs reading comprehension, fluency, and writing skill. using iPads and Macbooks in the classroom to promote language acquisition. We are exploring best practices through the use of these technologies. Our school is a STEAM school that encourages all students to develop a love and interest in technology , science and the arts. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). Our parent coordinator ensures that our newly enrolled ENLs are provided witht the summer reading assignment and supply lists. She provides information about school uniforms and contact information regarding parents preferred method of correspondance with the school. Our newly enrolled students are oriented to our school with a tour given by our parent coordinator or our ENL coordinator. New ENL students are assigned a, "buddy", in their respective classes who speaks the same language and can help the student acclimate to his/her new school environment. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? We offer Spanish as an elective language. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. 2018-19 CEP 73  In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? : For the Dual Language students, the, Side by Side model is used. 50% of their instruction is in Arabic. They are instructed in Arabic in Math, Science, and Arabic Language Arts. The remaining 50% of their instruction is in English. They are instructed in English in Social Studies and ELA. For their mandated ENL instruction, the students are grouped according to their proficiency level, and receive their instruction in the Integrated model and/ or, the Stand Alone model as prescribed by the the Chancellor's Regulations.The English proficient students are assessed by teacher-created assessments in Arabic. In Arabic Language Arts, assessments is Arabic are adminsitered quarterly. Math assessments are administered monthly. Science follows the NYS Scope and Sequence and students are tested six times a year. Students also complete four to six projects per year. Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? All teachers particpate in training that includes specific methodologies for ENL students. This occurs during the Monday and Tuesday after-school PD. Adminstration shares with all staff, opportunities to particpate in ENL professional development prepared and offered by DOE and non-DOE personnel. Scheduling accommodations are made for in-house and off site trainings. Tine is allocated during the school day and after for teachers to collaborate on best practices. Our teachers avail themselves of the offerings of the Brooklyn South Field Support Team. They cover a variety of topics including, but not limited to, compliance, common core standards, and supportive ENL methodolgy. Our ENL teachers are currently being trained in the use of Lightsail, an electronic program which recognizes varying lexile levels, and provides an appropriate text for each student. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. Our guidance counselor and Advisory teacher, have consultation groups with both eigth grade students and their parents. They talk about high school choices and determine if it is a fit for the student. Our guidance counselor reaches out to the schools which the majorityof our students attend and arranges to have our students go on a tour. Each school must provide professional development to all teachers and administrators that specifically addresses the needs of English language learners. A minimum of fifteen percent (15%) of the required professional development hours for all teachers prescribed by CR Part 80 must be dedicated to language acquisition, including a focus on best practices for co-teaching strategies and integrating language and content instruction for English language learners. For all bilingual and English as a new language teachers, a minimum of fifty percent (50%) of the required professional development hours must be dedicated to language acquisition in alignment with core content area instruction, including a focus on best practices for co-teaching strategies and integrating language and content instruction for English language learners. Records are maintained by using a sign-in sheet and keeping a copy of the agenda. 2018-19 CEP 74  Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? PS/IS 30 maintains an open door policy that allows parents to meet with their child's teachers on a regular basis. Parents are invited to scheduled meetings in addition to the Tuesday afternoon parental engagement time. Schools must individually meet with the parents or guardians of English language learners at least once a year. This is in addition to parent-teacher conferences, initial parent orientations, quarterly progress meetings or other scheduled meetings provided for parents or guardians, to discuss the goals of the program, their child’s language development progress, their child’s English language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas. This additional meeting should include school staff necessary to sufficiently inform the parents or guardians about the child’s language development in all content areas in English and in the child’s home language in the case of students enrolled in a bilingual education program. Such meetings are conducted with a qualified interpreter/translator in the language or mode of communication the parent or guardian best understands. Schools must determine the manner and form of such individual parent meetings, in accordance with collective bargaining agreements. Schools should record attendance using existing procedures. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Parents are invited to an after-school program to improve their own language skills. Parents are welcomed to bring their children and child care services were provided. Parents of all students are encouraged to volunteer during the school day and for after school activities . Through volunteering parents become more knowledgable about their child's school experience and the resources available to them. The Parent Coordinator makes special efforts to reach out to the ENL community. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. 2018-19 CEP 75 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Carol Heeraman, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 CEP 76  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: PS/IS30 School DBN: 20K030 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Carol Heeraman Title Principal Calliope Athanasakos Assistant Principal Donna Moscatello Parent Coordinator Mohamad Salama ENL/Bilingual Teacher Parent Teacher/Subject Area Mary Grace Owusu/Science Teacher/Subject Area Nadine Mastrogiacomo Richard Colon Coach Coach Audra Allen School Counselor Karina Costantino Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 6/29/2018 6/29/2018 6/29/20186/29/2018 6/29/2018 6/29/2018 6/29/2018 6/29/2018 6/29/2018 6/29/2018 6/29/2018 6/29/2018 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 2018-19 CEP 77  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 20K030 School Name: Mary White Ovington PS/IS 30 Superintendent: K. Costantino The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No *Donna Ilham Moscatello Atmani Parent Coordinator Yes Community Associate No yes Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. We use the home language ATS report to provide us with the various languages spoken by our parents and students. Once that is determined all of the bag-packed notices and information sent home is translated in that language by our staff and/or translation site. Our new messenger system allows us to program messages in various languages so parents receive that phone communication in their spoken language. For walk-in visitors who require translation in another language, a staff member is used the majority of the time, if unavailable the DOE translation service is usually called to assist visitors. We have a community associate who speaks Arabic to greet parents as they walk into the main office. During the first days of school all students are given the "blue emergency contact cards" to complete and return. The 6th graders and the Kindergartners received the folders during orientation in June with translated directions on how to complete the forms and return them on the first day of the school. On the card we request "parent's preferred langauge of communicaton; written and oral." Ms. Romeo, PA secretary, inputs all the data into ATS and 2018-19 CEP 78  we use the ATS report RAPL(Adult Preferred language) to determine our parents' written and spoken language at home. This report is printed by class and all documents sent home to parents are in the preferred language indicated. We monitor the accuracy of our blue cards having our school aides do a monthly cross-check with the ROCL and the RAPL, since we also have intermittent registration during the school year. In addition, informal assessments in the classroom are also conducted to identify the language that is spoken at home. We send notices home to parents in English as well as in the second language based on ATS students’ home languages data report. Our parent coordinator continues to provide outreach to our non-English speaking parents by gathering data to determine how to meet the needs of our non-English speaking parents. Members of the staff who speak another language also provide translation for our parents and assist in translating written information as well. We also utilize the free translation or interpretation services provided by the DOE . Our members of the SLT and members of the PTA are also involved and provide translation of materials on information being sent home as well. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Arabic English Chinese Spanish Albanian Russian Urdu Bengali Bihiri, Polish, Senufo, Serbian, Ukrainian, Vietnamese, Japanese 221 642 244 257 7 7 5 3 11 15.84% 46.02% 17.49% 18.42% .5% .5% .36% .22% .79% 228 628 190 257 7 10 6 4 8 116.34% 45.02% 13.62% 18.42% .5% .72% .43% .29% .57% 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. N/A Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. 2018-19 CEP 79  Document Name Month/Frequency How do you Distributed to Families , A. Parent Notices: ongoing a. Parent-Teacher conferences as prescribed and at parental request. b. Due process notices c. Student Intervention Teacher Letter to Parents/AIS d. Principal Suspension Notices e. School Attendance Lateness/Policy September f. Promotion and Grading Policy g. Immunization: as needed h. Cell phone policy i. NYS Testing notices j. SLT notices June 2018 September 2018 -June 2019 plan to translate? Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. Documents are first submitted to google translate in the preferred language and then given to a staff to make the appropriate modifications to the document. For monthly recurring documents such as calendar of events and grade calendar, this is sent by the grade Team leaders who prepares and review the document during grade team meetings, make changes and send for translation before the end the month so parents receive the new calendar in a ample time. 2018-19 CEP 80  Documents listed A-J all have the same process and procedure. the majority of the documents are in our student/parent handbook and parents receive the translated version in Arabic, Spanish, and Chinese. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school Each Tuesday parental engagement time- translators are provided as necessary Coffee and conversation with PTA 8:30 Tuesday mornings Parent/Teacher conferences as prescribed. Curriculum Night September Open House for incoming sixth graders-Sept/June Open House for incoming Kindergartners-Sept/June Independent tours Teachers are provided with head-sets and receivers to orally translate at school meetings. Student volunteers translate at various school events for community service September 2018 November 2018 March 2019 May 2019 plan to provide interpretation service(s)? For all parent events we provide a variety of interpretation services. Our messenger system relays voice and text messages in the parent home language. All events are announced through messenger, email and bag-packed home and parents receive the version based 2018-19 CEP 81  on the home-language. When parents walk-in and no staff is available to translate, we utilize the NYC translation system. During parent events our student leaders , where appropriate, are translators for our parents and assist as escorts. During curriculum night, orientation, and other events when parents are gathered in the auditorium, we have purchased translation head sets and our staff provide translation for our parents in the audience. For every event, our staff is readily available to assist in ensuring that information is properly communicated to our parents 2018-19 CEP 82  and they are clear about the needs of their children. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. Our messenger system relays voice and text messages in the parent home language. I hired a Community Associate who speaks Arabic, because of the high need at PS/IS 30. The best strategy is to higher staff in the main office and in the classrooms who speak the language of the community they serve, and we are attempting to achieve this goal. Our main languages are Arabic, Spanish, and Chinese. In the event of an emergency, if there is no staff is available who speaks the language (which seldom is the case) the next recourse is to use the NYC phone translation system. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. On the first day of school during faculty meetings all staff will be notified via staff handbook all the CRs, including A-663. Staff will also be verbally told that all communication to and information for parents must be provided in the parents' home language. All communication and notification that leaves the building from staff members has to be approved by an administrator. All administrators will monitor that information to parents are translated in order for parents to have full access. The parent coordinator will disseminate the Translation and Interpretation Unit information for all staff in case of an emergency situation. The translation and Interpretation unit information is posted and displayed in all offices around the building and accessible when a staff member is not available to assist with translation. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) PS/IS 30 provides parents with the following translated letters in native languages from the website: Office of English Language Learners: Parent Brochure; Parent Survey & Program Selection Form ;Placement Letter ; Entitlement Letter ; Continued Entitlement Letter Non Entitlement Letter ; Transition Letter ; Registration Form, inter-class transfer, and extended parent conversation letters immunization letters. 2018-19 CEP 83  Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? Our parents have always praised us for always having someone on staff to translate and assist in any situation. However, we always thrive to be better. The parent coordinator regularly meets with parents and gains feedback parent volunteers share information with the PTA The SLT discusses these issues and shares information with the community at large Teachers communicate with administration and share parental concerns. 2018-19 CEP 84 
