2018-19 COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (CEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 14K031 School Name: P.S. 031 SAMUEL F. DUPONT Principal: MARY J. SCARLATO 2018-19 CEP 1  Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 CEP 2  School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information Samuel F. Dupont 331400010031 Pre-K-5 School Number (DBN): 14K031 75 Meserole Avenue, Brooklyn, NY 11222 718-383-8998 Phone Number: 718-383-5652 Fax: Mary Scarlato mscarla@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Email Address: Mary Scarlato Tara Franco JennieWard/Kenny Volandes Tara Franco Jennie Ward NA NA District Information Geographical District: 14 Alicja Winnicki Superintendent: 206 Heyward Street, Brooklyn, NY 11206 Superintendent’s Office Address: awinnic@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718-302-7600 Phone Number: 718-302-7978 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) Brooklyn North FSC: Executive Director: Bernadette Fitzgerald 2018-19 CEP 3  Executive Director’s Office Address: 131 Livingston Street Brooklyn, NY 11201 bfitzge2@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 718-935-3594 Phone Number: 718-935-2382 Fax: 2018-19 CEP 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Mary Scarlato Tara Franco Jennie Ward NA KennyVolandes NA NA NA LouAnn Gallo Janet Zukowski Maria Puma *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/Assistant Principal Member/Teacher Member/ Teacher 2018-19 CEP 5  Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Lillian Casaceli Karin Block Andrea Martinez AnatheaSimpkins NA NA NA NA Member/Teacher Member/Parent Member/Parent Member/Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Member/ 2018-19 CEP 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with 2018-19 CEP 7  the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement 2018-19 CEP 8  Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Our shared vision is to develop critical thinkers and problem solvers through rigorous learning, and utilizing advanced technology. Highly qualified educators in partnership with parents and community will grow students who are prepared for success in post-secondary education and beyond. The mission of PS 31 is to cultivate a nurturing environment in which our school community is committed to challenge each student to meet his/her optimal potential academically, socially and emotionally by respecting, appreciating and challenging them in a caring community, while building a sense of responsibility and respect. Through rich and varied 2018-19 CEP 9  learning experiences, we will provide the vehicle for students to succeed in meeting the Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS) and lay the foundational skills needed for college and career readiness. Our goal is to have students become innovative thinkers, resourceful problem solvers, effective communicators, inspired learners, and productive and responsible citizens. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. PS 31 is located in the community of Greenpoint, Brooklyn. Our school serves pre-kindergarten through grade five, with 9% of our students ELL (English Language Learners), and 17% are SWD (Students with Disabilities). Our student population is multicultural with 9% Asian, 5% Black, 43% Hispanic, and 43% White. Many of the families living in our community are multi-generational. Currently, we have a group of parents who are alumni of PS 31, so parents are an integral part of the fabric of our school. One of our strengths at P.S.31, is exposing our students to as many life, health, and career experiences as possible, including music, art, dance, theatre, chess, computers, cooking, law, and environmental awareness/ecology. Our partnerships with many organizations, including ECO Schools USA, National Wildlife Federation, Brooklyn Historical Society, New York City Cook Shop (Food Bank NYC), and Common Threads/Small Bites, enable us to cultivate unique skills, and broaden life experiences. We believe that healthy bodies create healthy minds. Students will learn best when their minds and bodies are in sync. We have created a School Wellness Council consisting of parents, and a Student Wellness Council to look at the needs and strengths of our school, as well to create a plan to carry out our wellness vision to promote the behaviors and skills that will lead to a healthier life. In addition, through our Eco-Schools sustainability initiative this past school year, we have reduced waste with a 94% landfill diversion rate. We also reduced electricity by 12% and water by 5%. Our goal for the 2018-2019 school year is to focus on green spaces such as our school garden, as well as the five ECO-Schools pathways. PS 31 received Green Flag status during the 2016 - 2017 school year. Lastly, PS 31 works in partnership with many fine organizations: ECO Schools USA National Wildlife Federation Brooklyn Historical Society- Young Scholars Grow NYC SunWorks NYC Food Bank Common Threads -Small Bites Chess Pre-K Rocks Everyone Rocks Williamsburg Movement and Arts Center Hosh Kids 2018-19 CEP 10  Materials for the Arts Fuel Up to Play 60 Franklin Street Community Garden Road Runners Club Magnet Schools of America Brooklyn Public Library We believe students learn best when we acknowledge their personal strengths and needs and support them to build a strong connection to our school. Our students will be exposed to opportunities that will facilitate college and career readiness by providing goal setting opportunities, engaging and collaborative activities, developing students’ critical thinking skills, fostering the essential skills of communication and collaboration, and promoting the important academic and personal behaviors of persistence, independence, organizational skills, and self- regulation. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. Our subgroups in ELA have shown steady growth. Our SWD students in grades 3-5 have shown a three year increase of 37.7% of students scoring levels 3 and 4, from 7.1% in 2016 to 44.4% in 2018. Our Former ELL students made incredible gains on the NYS ELA increasing 35.1% over 3 years. Our Current ELL students in grades 3-5 made gains in ELA showing an increase of 12.5% over the three 3 year period. Black students showed a gain of 38.6% and Hispanic students' scores increased 14% in levels 3 and 4 over the three years. Our male students also showed a gain of 20.3%. In Math, Black students have shown a three year increase of 30.5% of students scoring levels 3 and 4, from 36.4% in 2016 to from 75% in 2018. In Math, Former ELL students showed a 3 year increase of 16.7% from 85.7% in 2016 to 100% in 2018. Our Current ELL students showed a decline of 11.1% over the 3 year period. White students also showed a decline of 11.4% of students scoring levels 3 and 4 over the three year period. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. Our Framework Element Scores from our 2017-18 School Quality Guide Report show we scored highest in Strong Family and Community Ties at 4.00 which was an increase of .17 points from 2016-17. We scored 3.49 in Effective School Leadership, 3.05 in Trust, 3.41 in Rigorous Instruction and 3.38 in Collaborative Teachers. On the indicator of Rigorous Instruction we decreased .29 points from 3.70 in 2016-17. Although we decreased overall, we showed growth this past year in ELA (English Language Arts). On the NYS ELA Assessment, all students scoring levels 3 and 4 in grades 3 through 5 showed a three year increase of 10.5% from 64.6% in 2016 to 71.9% in 2018, and a 5.4% increase over one year period. Our Students with Disabilities made terrific progress showing an increase of 37.7% of students scoring levels 3 and 4 on the NYS ELA Assessment over the three year period. Our Former ELL students have shown incredible progress in ELA, with a 3 year increase of 35.1% of students scoring levels 3 and 4. Our Current ELLs have shown good progress as well with a three year increase with a 12.5% of students receiving a level 3 or 4 on the NYS ELA Assessment. All of our subgroups except Asian showed a three year increase on the NYS ELA Assessment in 2017-18. Our Black subgroup of students has shown an incredible three year increase of 2018-19 CEP 11  38.6%of students scoring levels 3 and 4. Hispanic students showed an increase of 14.0%, Male students showed an increase of 20.3%, white students an increase of 5.8%of students scoring levels 3 and 4. Collaborative Teachers was another strong area in the Framework Element Scores on our 2017-2018 School Quality Guide Report for 2017-18. Teachers feel that they can count on their peers to support them. There is a culture of collaboration, and collective responsibility amongst our pedagogues. Additionally, our data trends have also revealed subgroups of students who have declined in achievement in Math. Our Current ELLs in grades 3-5 have shown a 3 year decrease of 11.1% of students scoring levels 3 and 4 on the NYS Math Assessment. White students showed a decrease of 11.4%, females showed a decline of 6.5% and Students with Disabilities showed a decrease of 2.1% of students scoring levels 3 and 4 on the NYS Math Assessment over the three year period. Therefore, our instructional focus will be to increase rigorous instruction by developing strategic problem solvers and build mathematical discourse to improve student outcomes including ELL, SWD and low performing subgroups. Our school has been recognized many times over the years for our academic accomplishments. Historically, PS 31 has been an academically high achieving school since 1975. In May of 2017 we were recognized by NCUST (National Center for Urban School Transformation) and awarded "2017 America's Best Urban Schools Award." We were awarded with National Blue Ribbon status for academic excellence in 2009. In addition, we were designated as a Title I Rewards School status for four years for high achievement state-wide. 2018-19 CEP 12  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 14K031 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration PK,0K,01,02,03,04,05 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 592 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 9 9 18 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 9 5 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 72.0% % Attendance Rate 64.5% % Reduced Lunch 7.1% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.8% 41.7% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 42.9% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 18.09 0% 10% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 72.0% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 96% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A YES YES N/A NO Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A YES YES N/A YES Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A YES High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 64 64 93.8% 6.4% 13.9% 4.6% 9.3% 1.5% 4 2% 7 72.2% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No N/A N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 CEP 13  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. An analysis of our data trends show: Based on the Framework Elements in the School Quality Guide Report 2018, we scored an overall 3.41 in Rigorous Instruction which is a .29 decrease from 2017. On the NYS ELA Assessment, all students in grades 3-5 scoring levels 3 and 4 showed a three year increase of 10.5% from 64.6% in 2016 to 71.9% in 2018, and a 5.4% increase over one year period. Black students showed tremendous progress with a 38.6% increase of students scoring levels 3 and 4 over the three years. Our SWD (Students with Disabilities) have shown excellent progress in ELA, with a three year increase of 37.7% students scoring levels 3 and 4, from 7.1% in 2016 to 44.4% in 2018. Hispanic students have made some progress in Math as well over the 3 years with a 1.7% increase of students receiving a level 3 or 4 on the NYS Math Assessment. Our Black subgroup of students has shown an incredible three year increase of 30.5% of students scoring levels 3 and 4 on the NYS ELA from 36.4% in 2016 to 75% in 2018. Former ELLs also made good progress increasing 16.7% scoring levels 3 and 4 over three years. Additionally, our data trends have also revealed subgroups of students who have declined in achievement. In Math, Current ELL students have shown a three year 11.1% decline of students scoring levels 3 and 4. In Math, SWD declined 2.1% of students scoring levels 3 and 4 over the three year period from 2016-2018. Female students have shown a three year decline of 6.5%, and white students show an 11.4% decrease of students scoring levels 3 and 4 on the NYS Math Assessment. Based on all available data, advance observation data, teacher feedback at team meetings, and May-June reflection of our Math program, we found gaps to address in the Math units. Therefore, our K-5 teacher teams will collaboratively develop and revise our units of study and math performance tasks to ensure that students are strategically solving math problems and building mathematical discourse. 2018-19 CEP 14  Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, we will increase critical thinking and problem solving skills in grade K-5 as measured by aligning our Math units with Exemplars performance tasks, rubrics and assessments. 2018-19 CEP 15  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Teachers in grades K-5 will develop and revise units integrating the Exemplars Program with Houghton Mifflin's Go Math, a Common Core aligned program. Teacher teams will add Exemplars problems and performance tasks to develop critical thinking, and reasoning skills in mathematics. We will hire a Math Exemplars coach to provide professional development for K-5 teachers. Teacher team common grade level planning of units/lessons will include multiple entry points for all learners including SWDs and ELLs. Differentiated tasks for Exemplars will be utilized both within grade level as well as access to lower grade level if needed as a scaffold support. Flexible grouping within the classrooms based on formative assessment throughout lessons and summative assessment through the use of rubrics will support formation and adjustments of groups and allow focus on sub group needs. Teacher teams create common assessments, performance tasks, and common rubrics. Professional development will focus on data driven, standards-driven instruction. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Teachers in Grades K-5 Sept 2018-June 2019 Teachers K-5 Sept 2018-June 2019 Teachers in Grades K-5 School Leaders, Teacher Leaders, School Leaders, Teacher Leaders Teachers in Grades K-5 Teacher Teams Sept 2018-April. 2019 School Leaders, Teacher Teams Sept. 2018-May 2019 School Leaders Teacher Teams 2018-19 CEP 16  Grade level teacher teams will participate in bi-monthly learning walks Teachers Oct 2018-June 2019 Teacher Collaborative Inquiry Teams (vertical and horizontal) analyze student work in Math using the ATLAS protocol. Teacher teams plan next steps, adjust units and instruction based on analysis of student thinking and work. Teachers track student subgroup data to support student achievement. Math block (grades 1-5) will be adjusted to include time to develop problem solving skills and strategies to support the Math Exemplars work. Teachers School Leaders, Teacher Leaders Sept 2018-June 2019 Teachers School Leaders Teacher Leaders Sept 2018-June 2019 Sept 2018-June 2019 School Leaders Teacher Teams School Leaders Teacher Teams Teacher teams create and send home grade level newsletters to inform parents of learning objectives. Parents Oct. 2018-June 2019 School Leaders, Teacher Leaders Parent workshops in Math by teacher teams on Tuesday afternoons to educate parents on the deeper thinking, type of questions. All stakeholders, parents, staff, school leaders will work together collaboratively to ensure that this goal is attained through faculty meetings, SLT meetings, PTA meetings, school website. Parents Jan. 2019-Mar. 2019 School Leaders, Teacher Teams Parents, School Staff, Parents, Students Nov. 2018- School Leaders Jan. 2019 2018-19 CEP 17 After School Literacy and Math Program After School Literacy and Math Program for ELL Students in grades 3-5 in need of AIS Jan. 2019-April 2019 Jan. 2019- April 2019 School Leaders School Leaders Students, ELL and Former ELL grades 3-5 Students, ELL and Former ELL in grades 3-5 Saturday Academy for Literacy and Math Feb. 2019-April 2019 School Leaders 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. PTA meetings, Meet the Teacher Night/Curriculum Conferences, workshops held by pedagogues and our parent coordinator on various topics: Curriculum, Rigorous Instruction and Common Core - Classroom Teachers - Parent Night - September 2018 Rigorous Instruction - School Leaders and Teachers - January 2019 Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Schedule 90 minute Math blocks in grades 1–5. Program common planning periods 4 times per month for teacher teams. Program vertical team meetings 2 times per month. 2018-19 CEP 18  Hire Math Exemplars coach/consultant Per-Session for writing curriculum units and June planning for September 2018. Per-Session for After School and Saturday Academy. Per-Session for ELL After School and Saturday Academy. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA X Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A X C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind X Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By January of 2019, students will show an increase of 10% from the baseline math performance task. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) End of the year Exemplars Performance Task Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 19  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? Based on the Framework for Great Schools Report 2018, Supportive Environment was 3.76, one of the areas in which we decreased from 3.88 in 2016. In the Social Emotional component we decreased 1.06 points from 4.10 in 2017 to 3.08 in 2018. Therefore, we want to build upon school culture with the continued implementation of the Leader in Me program to improve classroom behavior and social emotional wellness of students. The implementation of the Leader in Me program will be a continuation of our efforts of creating citizens who are proactive, good listeners, and work together to accomplish their goals. This program includes the students, parents and entire staff. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By May 2019, there will be an increase in positive school culture (Engagement, Empowerment, and Relationships), as measured by The Leader in Me School pre and post Survey on school culture. 2018-19 CEP 20  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? The Leader in Me pre-survey for fourth and fifth grade students online. Students Oct. 2018-Nov. 2018 School Leaders The Leader in Me pre-survey for teachers. Lighthouse Team Teachers Lighthouse Team A school wide goal will be selected. Staff Oct. 2018 School Leaders Classes will build on their leadership notebooks. Lighthouse Team Teachers Students Oct. 2018 Teachers Students will track goals in leadership notebooks. Nov. 2018 Students Lighthouse Team Teachers Lighthouse Team Establish a Teacher Action Teams to create Student Lighthouse Team on school culture and environment that meets twice monthly to empower students in leadership roles to address and offer solutions to our school's needs. Teachers Jan. 2019 School Leaders, Lighthouse Team 2018-19 CEP 21 All stakeholders: Parents, staff, school leaders will work together collaboratively to ensure that this goal is attained through PTA meetings, SLT meetings, school website, professional development. Student-run Leadership Day School Staff, Parents, Students Oct. 2018-May 2019 School Leaders Teacher Leaders May 2019 Students School Staff Parents Students School Leaders, Lighthouse Team 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Leader in Me Parent Workshops November 2018- The Lighthouse Team (teachers, school leaders, and parent coordinator) March 2019 - The Lighthouse Team (teachers, school leaders, and parent coordinator) May 2019 - The Lighthouse Team (teachers, school leaders, and parent coordinator) Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Scheduling assemblies. Purchasing materials and professional services from Leader in Me. Purchasing student resources and awards. Scheduling Student Council meetings. Scheduling parent workshops. Scheduling professional training – Leader in Me. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other 2018-19 CEP 22  Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Mid-point survey on current school culture and student leadership will be administered to staff and students in October 2018. In February 2019, a post-survey for staff on current school culture will be administered to measure the positive effects on supportive school environment to see if our goal of an increase on positive school culture is met. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. The Leader in Me Survey - Students and Teachers Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 23  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Based on our latest Quality Review, indicator 4.2: "Grade level teacher teams have regularly scheduled opportunities to work collaboratively on planning and improving practices. Teachers also adjust existing units of study by adding thinking skills and strategies. The school is now shifting the focus of this work toward collaborative inquiry centered on looking at student writing to meet one of the school-wide improvement goals." Data from the School Quality Guide Report 2017-18 shows a score of 3.38, an overall decrease of .29 points from 2016-17. Based on teacher observations by administrators, and teacher feedback, we will continue our PLC (Professional Learning Communities) study groups focusing on Data Driven, Standards Driven Instruction, and Assessment. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By May 2019, teachers and paraprofessionals will have participated in professional learning communities based on their inquiry work. Each Professional Learning Community will select a problem of practice to study and implement strategies in their classroom that have improved teaching and learning as measured by an increase in Effective in 3d (Assessment in Instruction). These strategies will be shared school wide. 2018-19 CEP 24  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Professional Learning Communities (PLCs) will be created on the topics from the Atlas Protocol data and meet twice monthly. Grade Level Inquiry Teams Nov. 2018-May 2019 School Leaders Teacher Leaders PLCs will present their learning to the staff during professional development. Teacher teams will develop strategies to improve teaching to address student weaknesses (via ATLAS Protocol). Teacher teams will adjust math units and lessons to address student weaknesses. Grade Level Inquiry Teams Dec. 2018 and May 2019 School Leaders, Teacher Leaders Teacher Teams, Nov. 2018-May 2019 School Leaders, Teacher Leaders Students Teacher Teams Oct. 2018- May 2019 School Leaders, Teachers Teacher teams will create scaffolds to support the needs of all subgroups including SWDs and ELLs. Student support for math will be a focus in the PLC group as well as using Exemplar resources as an additional entry pint for our SWDs and ELLs. Teacher leaders will share their findings and best practices that will impact instruction and student achievement during Vertical Team meetings. Teacher Teams Oct. 2018- May 2019 School Leaders, Teachers School Leaders Teacher Leaders Teacher Leaders, Teachers Twice monthly from Oct. 2018- June 2019 2018-19 CEP 25  3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. PTA Meetings, School Events -Potluck Dinner and Spring Festival, Parent Workshops September 2018 - School Leaders and Teachers November 2018 - School Leaders, Teachers and Parent Coordinator January 2019 - School Leaders, Teachers and Parent Coordinator Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Schedule PLC meetings twice monthly. Schedule Vertical Team meetings twice monthly. Purchase classroom resources and supplemental materials based on the outcome of the Inquiry Team Meetings. Schedule inter-visitation to share best practices within our school. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, the Exemplars pieces will be reviewed by teacher teams to measure student progress utilizing Atlas Protocol. By March 2019, teachers will adjust instruction based on formative assessment as measured by an increase in Highly Effective in Advance [MOTP (Measures of Teacher Practice) 3d (Assessment in Instruction)]. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Advance - MOTP (Measures of Teaching Practice) Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 26  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Based on the School Quality Guide Report 2017-18, we scored 3.81 Effective School Leadership which shows a decrease of 35 points from 2016-17. In addition, teacher feedback during one on one conferences and surveys indicate a need to build capacity by developing strong teacher leaders and teacher teams. Therefore we see a need to continue to build capacity in teacher teams, and thus a goal this school year. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, school leaders will build capacity by developing teacher leaders to support teacher teams in a systematic approach to data driven instruction as measured by a 5% increase in Effective in Advance in MOTP 1e- Designing Coherent Instruction. 2018-19 CEP 27  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Teacher leaders will be trained by Math Exemplars consultant. Their classrooms will become lab sites for their grade level teams. Inter-visitations will be scheduled. Teacher Leaders Sept. 2018-June 2019 School Leaders Teachers attend professional development workshops on Math Exemplars. Teachers Sept 2018-April. 2019 School Leaders, Teacher Leaders Grade level teacher inquiry teams meet bi-monthly to analyze math data and create action plans using the ATLAS protocol and Data Analysis Protocol for Teachers. Assistant principal will attend and support teacher leaders and teacher teams. Teacher Teams will incorporate strategies and supports to address the needs of SWDs and ELLs. Differentiated tasks within grades will be utilized as well as additional grade level support if needed. Teachers Sept. 2018- School Leaders June 2019 Teacher Leaders Teacher Leaders Sept. 2018- June 2019 School Leaders Teachers Oct. 2018-June 2019 School Leaders Vertical Team (Teacher Leaders from each grade) meet monthly with school leaders to reflect, give feedback. Teacher Leaders School leaders will observe teachers and give feedback on designing and adjusting coherent instruction. Nov. 2018-May 2019 Teachers Teacher Leaders Teacher leader will support new teachers in Math Exemplars. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. School Leadership Team Meetings 2018-19 CEP 28  October 2018 November 2018 January 2019 PTA Meetings - Increasing Parent Involvement December 2018 March 2019 May 2019 Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Schedule Teacher Team Inquiry meeting twice monthly. Schedule Vertical Team meetings twice monthly. Per session for curriculum writing. Funding for Math Exemplars coach/consultant. Schedule and fund professional development in Math Exemplars. Purchase books, materials and resources for implementing Math Exemplars program. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Teacher feedback during pre and post observation conferences. By mid-year (Feb. 2019) there will be a 5% increase in Effective scores on component 1e from Advance MOTP. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. 2018-19 CEP 29  Advance MOTP 1e Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 30  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. After analyzing all available data we found that we are strong in teacher outreach to parents we found a need to increase parent involvement and engagement within our school. On our latest Quality Review 2014-2015, the findings under Quality Indicator 3.4 stated: "Teachers and leaders consistently communicate with parents about the goals and expectations for learning and provide families with next steps and frequent feedback on their children's progress. In addition to assessment results sent home regularly, grade level teams create monthly newsletters for parents with information regarding the mastery of skills." In addition, on our School Quality Guide Report 2017-18, on the element of Strong Family-Community Ties, under Outreach to Parents we received a score of 4.00, an increase of .17 from 2016-17. Therefore, our focus will be to continue to increase parent engagement and involvement in our school through "Green STEAM" parent workshops. Our "Green Steam" program will be launched for the 2017-2018 school year in our Steam wing. The Green Steam room will follow a curriculum created by Sun works designed for grades Pre K to 5th grade. Lessons will be tailored to each grade level and include hydroponics and many experiments. The tech Steam Room is fully equipped with steam carts designed to focus on technology and engineering. Both of these rooms will be utilized for students during the school day and for parent workshops after school. These workshops will include projects such as soil testing from nearby playgrounds in the neighborhood. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By May 2019, the Green Wellness Committee will involve parents in meetings and workshops related to our Healthy Schools initiatives as evidenced by attending monthly Green Wellness meetings and workshops for parents, refurbishing our Garden of Happiness, and the creation of the outdoor classroom. 2018-19 CEP 31  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Our Sustainability Coach will facilitate a monthly meeting. Topics are developed by the interest and ideas from the previous meeting. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Parents October 2018 School Leaders Our Sustainability Coach will work closely with parents and teachers on initiatives such as providing healthier alternatives to cleaning the school environment. Teachers Parents Nov. 2018-March 2019 Sustainability Coach School Leaders Parent Leaders Sustainability Coach Teachers will be invited to three workshops hosted by parents/and or the Sustainability Coach. The entire school community will participate in creating a sensory garden in our play yard for community use. Teachers May 2019 Parent Leaders Students May 2019 School Leaders Sustainability Coach Parent Leaders Sustainability Coach 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. National Wildlife Federation - Eco-Schools Partnership Sunworks - Green STEAM The Leader in Me Partnership 2018-19 CEP 32  Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Scheduling monthly meetings. Scheduling parent workshops. Scheduling teacher workshops. Scheduling class activities/events. Purchasing resources/materials specific to the activities. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA Title II, Part A SIG X PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. An evaluation form will be given to parents with a 25% response rate of feedback Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Creation of the sensory garden. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 33  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) ●Belowgrade level on Fountas and Pinnell Assessment K-2 ●Students who score level 1 & 2 on NYS ELA ●Students who score below the median scale score level on the NYS ELA between level 2& 3 ●Teacher Recommend-ation ●Parent request for help ●PPT request ●Fundations Reading ●Small group ●Whole group ●Close Reading with Purpose Strategies before reading: frontload vocabulary, preview, discuss, predict, and connect. ●Strategies during reading: question text, question author, determine context clues. ●Strategies after reading: retell, clarify points of confusion, make connections, text-to-self, text-to-text, text-world, summarizing ●Strategic AIS grouping in the classroom ●Push-In/Pull-Out during the school day, After School, Saturday Academy ●Strategic AIS grouping in classroom ● Push-in/ Pull-out during the day ●After School, Saturday Academy ●Data Inquiry Team Referral Mathematics ●Studentswho score level 1 & 2 on NYS Math ●Explicit and Systematic Instruction ●Representation techniques ●Small Group ●Whole Group ●Students who score below the median scale score level on the NYS ELA between level 2& 3 2018-19 CEP 34  Science Social Studies ●Level 1 and level 2 on MOSL Baseline and NYS Math 2017 in K-2 ●Teacher Recommendation ●Parent Request for help ●SAT (School Assessment Team) request ●Level 1 and level 2 on NYS Science 2017 Grade 4 ●Level 1 and low level 2 on assessments ●Teacher Recommendation ●Parent Request for help ●SAT Team request ●Level 1 and level 2 on assessments ●Academic Vocabulary ●Small Group ●Whole Group ●Strategic AIS grouping in classroom ●Content Vocabulary ●Push-In during the day ●Academic Vocabulary ●Small group ●Whole Group ●Strategic AIS grouping in classroom ●Teacher recommendation ●Content Vocabulary ●Push-In during the day ●Parent Request for help ●SAT Team request ●Parent Request ●Teacher request At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) ●Counseling -Guidance Counselor ●Small group ●Pull out during the school day ●Individual ●“At Risk” Counseling- School Psychologist ●Social Skills – Guidance Counselor 2018-19 CEP 35  2018-19 CEP 36  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 14 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. Basic emergency supplies such as school supplies and books and will reach out to agencies for support to purchase glasses, counseling services, intervention services such as SPIRE and DIBELS, and parent outreach by SBST and the parent coordinator. Ms. Jenkins, our school mental health outreach person will support families with workshops and free available resources. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). NA 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 CEP 37  NA 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. NA 2018-19 CEP 38  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. 100% of the teaching staff at PS 31 is comprised of NYS certified teachers. Newly hired teachers become part of our professional staff and take part in an extremely successful mentoring program receiving professional development in all curriculum areas throughout the year. New teachers receive ongoing assistance with organizing their classrooms to create an effective environment, classroom management, developing units/lesson plans, teaching strategies, engaging students in learning, and assessing student learning. Our lead teachers provide guidance, support and training for new teachers utilizing model classrooms as lab sites for developing teaching methodology. Teachers are taught a common language through the use of The Danielson Framework for Teaching. Intervisitations are scheduled so that new teachers can implement successful techniques and practices in their classrooms. All teachers in PS 31 are supported with high quality professional learning workshops which are differentiated to address the needs of both new and experienced staff, directing their attention to individual strengths and weaknesses, grade level needs, content area focus and teacher learning styles. We will devote sessions this year to address Data Driven Standards-Driven Instruction, and Assessment in Instruction. We will continue our study of Reciprocal Teaching, Making Thinking Visible as well continuing our implementation of The Leader in Me. The school leaders, lead teachers, the Lighthouse Team and consultants will contribute toward this high quality professional learning. We will continue our practice of PLC study groups. Staff members attend conferences and workshops given by the district. In addition to professional development sessions, we hold collaborative grade team meetings twice per week to plan curriculum and implement instructional strategies that meet each grade’s specific goals. Teachers providing AIS are given an opportunity to meet and share ideas with teachers whose students they service. From May through June we start our curriculum mapping/June planning for the upcoming September in all core curriculum areas. This provides our teachers and school leaders time to collaboratively reflect, assess, plan and provide a focus for the upcoming school year. These meetings also provide school leaders an opportunity to encourage and support staff in renewing and refining their craft regularly. Frequent cycles of observation and feedback on the Danielson’s Framework drive our professional development programs. Our goal is to ensure the continued achievement for all of our students. The ongoing learning of our professional staff will support us in attaining our goal. PS 31’s highly successful and intensive mentoring program is a major element of the support and professional learning for new teachers. This will ensure high quality teaching to ascertain that all students including students with disabilities and English language learners receive sound instruction by highly qualified teachers. New teachers are recruited via colleague recommendations, recruitment fairs and “The New Teacher Finder.” An interview team reviews the resumes and conducts interviews. Assignments are 2018-19 CEP 39  made based on the qualifications, performance and expertise of the teachers, as well as the teachers’ preference sheet as per the UFT contract. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). PS 31 provides ongoing and highly effective professional learning to our entire staff including school leaders, teachers and paraprofessionals, aligned with CCLS (Common Core Learning Standards). These professional learning sessions provide staff with the opportunity to work collaboratively as teams to analyze data, set long and short term goals, apply and share best practices to increase student achievement. The Framework for Great Schools, and our school instructional focus will be the compass for professional learning. We begin our June planning and review of the school year in April. Our curriculum team begins revising and developing curriculum throughout the summer. Pedagogy (teachers and paraprofessionals) will be provided with professional learning. Teacher self-reflection and data from observations will serve as a needs assessment to differentiate, and address the needs of all teachers, directing attention to individual strengths and weaknesses, grade level needs, content area focus and teacher learning styles. In the 2017-2018 school year, professional learning sessions will be dedicated to both short-term and sustained professional learning experiences directed towards preparing staff to move students towards meeting higher standards (all sub-groups including SWDs and ELLs) as well as actively supporting teacher growth. We will continue our Professional Learning Communities study groups. (PLCs). PLCs will be devoted to studying successful teaching practices, and study groups through professional books. This professional learning will ensure that teachers and paraprofessionals shift classroom practice, and plan units and lessons that include the use of performance tasks to assess learning to improve student outcomes. Our professional learning will include: Math Exemplars The Leader in Me Thinking Maps Data Driven Instruction Reciprocal Teaching Technique Analyzing Class and Student Data Using ATLAS Protocol to Look at Student Work Planning and Adjusting Ready Gen units/lessons based on data/student work Supporting and Scaffolding Learning for ELLs and SWDs Assessing Student Learning – Formative Assessments Building Sustainability into the curriculum- Recycling, Composting Core Curriculum for Social Studies Differentiation and Grouping Strategies 2018-19 CEP 40  Multiple Entry Points Parent Engagement Child Abuse Questioning and Discussion Techniques ELL Practices and Strategies to Support all Content Areas Fountas and Pinnell Reading Assessments Professional learning consistently emphasizes the paramount importance of improving teacher practice and student outcomes. Emphasis is placed on quality, rigorous teaching to ensure that all students, including ELLs and SWDs receive the same grade-appropriate curriculum using innovative teaching methods and instructional strategies to successfully meet CCLS standards. During the course of the school year, opportunities will be provided for inter-visitations between our school and other schools in the district. Staff members attend conferences, workshops and training sessions both in our school and through the district. In addition, teacher leaders, school leaders and consultants provide professional learning sessions. Teacher team grade level common planning meetings are scheduled twice per week for collaborative planning in order to meet each grade’s specific goals and needs. Teachers providing AIS are given an opportunity to meet and plan with teachers whose students they service. Vertical team meetings are scheduled one time per month. From May through June we start our curriculum planning (June Planning) for September in all curriculum areas. This provides our teachers and administrators time to collaboratively reflect, assess, plan and provide a focus for the upcoming school year. These meetings also provide administrators an opportunity to encourage and support staff to renew and refine their craft regularly. Evaluations and feedback on teacher needs drive our professional learning programs. It will always be a goal of PS 31 to ensure the continued achievement for all our students. The ongoing learning of our professional staff will help us attain our goal. The principal and assistant principals attend workshops and clinics given by the district, Borough Field Support Office/NYCDOE, and CSA. The administrators visit other schools in the district to go on walkthroughs, and share best practices. Our assistant principals attend study groups facilitated at the district. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A Part 4: SWP Schools Only 2018-19 CEP 41  4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). A successful transition for all students and their families coming from early childhood programs, pre-school program under IDEA or state-run preschool programs to the School Wide Programs is of primary importance. The following research from “ESEA” mirrors the philosophy of PS 31’s Early Childhood Program. “Give students a strong successful start in education…to increase the probability that these children will succeed, activities should be provided in smaller classes with appropriate quality reading and mathematics instruction as part of the overall program.” PS 31’s kindergarten program provides students with the basic academic skills needed for long term success in school while providing a safe, nurturing environment. Parents are an important component in the transitional period. The school will demonstrate interest and support for each child’s family. The following will be provided to secure a successful transition for students and families. - Opportunities are provided for parents and children to tour the school and become familiar with the kindergarten program easing transition including a workshop in June for Pre-K families. - Family meetings will be organized in order to answer questions and concerns regarding their children who will be moving into kindergarten. - Provide a forum to discuss their perceptions and expectations for kindergarten and elementary school. - Students’ academic and emotional needs will be constantly observed and assessed so interventions can be provided as necessary. - Pupil Personnel team to address needs of kindergarten students, AIS services, support services for all kindergarten students with IEPs, Achieve 3000 assessments, observations by teachers and the SAT team. Screening for hearing and vision. - Provide information about the PTA and the parent coordinator to serve as a link between the parents and school as well as the school website and parent workshops. -Turning Five students will be evaluated prior to admission to determine if services are still necessary for kindergarten. -Pre-Kindergarten units of study prepare students with the content that will be studied further in kindergarten, for example, the unit of “The Five Senses,” provides students with background knowledge for the kindergarten science curriculum. -During center time, students are asked focus questions built upon Bloom’s Taxonomy which is a foundation for the higher order questions aligned with the kindergarten standards. -Building Blocks mathematics program aligns with the Go Math kindergarten program. Building Blocks builds the curriculum foundation for the number sense and problem solving skills needed for kindergarten math. -Pre-kindergarten and the Early Childhood grades are combined for professional learning communities on such topics as: Questioning and Discussion, and Making Thinking Visible. 2018-19 CEP 42  -Pre-kindergarten and kindergarten teachers meet in June to transfer records and discuss student needs. 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. Teachers are an integral part of the decision making at PS 31. Our teachers are represented on the School Leadership Team (SLT). We have common planning and vertical team teacher meetings. Teacher leaders facilitate the team meetings, plan, and share best practices collaboratively, develop common assessments and rubrics. Our teams utilize the ATLAS protocol to look at student work and use the finding to plan next steps, adjust their units of study and lesson plans. Through teacher feedback, teachers and leaders make decisions regarding the use and selection of multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided to ensure the use of assessment results. For example, teachers expressed a need for a common formal assessment structure for independent reading levels. Therefore, the school leaders purchased and provided professional development in assessing students using the Fountas and Pinnell Leveled Reading System. Teachers then analyze results to create reading groups. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Column B Section Reference(s) Section 5A Part 4b Title I Part A (Basic) Federal Title II, Part A Federal 331,537 74,697 X X Section 5B, Part 4b, Section 5C, Part 4b, Section 5D, Part 4b Section 5E, Part 4b Section 5A, Part 4b 2018-19 CEP 43  Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Federal Federal 0 12,366 Tax Levy (FSF) Local 3,005,554 N/A N/A X N/A Section 5A, Part 4b Section 5A Part 4b Section 5B, Part 4b, Section 5C, Part 4b, Section 5D, Part 4b Section 5E, Part 4b 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not 2018-19 CEP 44  available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 CEP 45  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. 14K031 Samuel F. Dupont, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. PS 31 will support parents and families of Title I students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; 2018-19 CEP 46  ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; The school’s Parent Involvement Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; transition workshops and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home;  provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report;  host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right 2018-19 CEP 47  to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the ESSA; ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) School-Parent Compact (SPC) 14K031 Samuel F. Dupont, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for 2018-19 CEP 48  improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas;  providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; 2018-19 CEP 49  ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities 2018-19 CEP 50  ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; 2018-19 CEP 51  ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 2018-19 CEP 52  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): K 6 1 7 2 8 3 9 4 10 5 11 12 25 2018-19 CEP 53  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: English Language Learners (ELLs) participate in our school wide after school program supporting students' language proficiency needs. Student need is determined by data culled from various sources including EDAT, NYSESLAT results, school and classroom tests, as well as teacher observation. These classes will be designed to suit the individual needs of ELLs and Former ELLs. Students will be grouped by proficiency level. We will have three groups: Group 1 will consist of 3 students (1 Entering, 2 Emerging in grades 3, 4, 5) will be targeted in order to support their foundational skills . They will be instructed by one ESL certified teacher Teacher (Ratio of 1 teacher to 3 students). Group 2, 2 Transitioning students in grade 3/4, 5 Expanding students in grades 3/4 and 2 Commanding students in grades 3/4. They will be instructed by one ESL certified teacher and one Common Branch teacher (Ratio of 2 teachers to 9 students). Group 3 will consist of 6 students in grade 5, 2 Transitioning and 1 Expanding and 3 Commanding. They will be instructed by one ESL certified teacher (Ratio of 1 teachers to 6 students). These groups are designed to suit the needs of ELLs ranging from emerging through commanding levels and will receive differentiated instruction from a teacher certified in ESL assisted by Common Branch teachers. . The program will be open to ELLs currently entitled to ESL services as well as former ELLs. The language of instruction will be English. The program will take place after school on Wednesdays and Thursdays from 2:30-4:00pm, allowing for 1 1/2 hours of differentiated instruction in ELA two times per week. The duration of the program will be twelve weeks totalling 24 sessions English language learners with disabilities will have full access to the program beginning on January 7, 2019 and ending on April 17, 2019. There will also be a Saturday Academy class with 2 groups, grade 3/4 bridge class consisting of 9 students, and a 5th grade class consisting of 8 students. The 3/4 bridge class will consist of 2 Transitioning, 4 Expanding and 3 Commanding students. The 5th grade class will consist of 2 Entering, 2 Transitioning, 2 Expanding and 3 Commanding students. The Students will receive differentiated instruction in ELA and Mathematics from one ESL certified teacher, assisted by one Common Branch teacher. The teachers will provide direct instruction using the Parallel Teaching Model. The teachers will switch every 2 hours to service all ELLs with ESL instruction. The language of instruction will be English. The program will run 6 sessions, for 4 hours per session on Saturdays from 8am-12pm beginning on January 5, 2109 and ending on March 30, 2019. Students in all classes will be given a bilingual electronic dictionary in their home language and English for home language support. Grade three will be comprised of 4 ELL students eligible for Title III Supplemental Services. Of the 4 students who took the NYSESLAT last spring, 20% are working at the Entering level. Additionally, 60% are performing at the Transitioning level, and 20% are at the Expanding level. One hundred percent of our advanced level third graders show reading and 2018-19 CEP 54  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information writing as the modalities that need strengthening in order to reach proficiency. These students did not take the ELA (NY State English Language Arts) exam last spring. Instruction provided will be rigorous and academically challenging in order to prepare them for their first ELA. Grade four will be comprised of 5 ELLs eligible for Title III Supplemental Services. Four students (80%) who took the NYSESLAT last spring are functioning at the Expanding level. Of the 4 Expanding level students who took the NYS ELA, 3 scored a Level 1 and one student scored a Level 3. The remaining student (20%) is functioning at the Entering level, and was exempt from the NYS ELA exam. Reading and writing are the modalities in which these students need the most reinforcement. Grade five will be comprised of 5 ELL students eligible for Title III Supplemental Services. All of these students took the NYSESLAT in Spring 2016. Two students (40%) are performing at the Expanding level. One of the Expanding studnets scored a Level 2 on the NYS ELA, and the other scored a Level 1. One student (20%) is performing at the Transitioning level. She took the NYS ELA and scored a Level 1. The remaining two students (40%) are at the Entering Level and were exempt from the NYS ELA. Instruction for grades three through five is driven by the higher order thinking skills outlined in Bloom’s Taxonomy. Therefore, instruction for the Title III Supplemental Services will be targeted to reading comprehension geared to interpreting, analyzing, evaluating and applying. Our literacy initiative targeting strategic skills in reading will be utilized, Specifically: • Inferencing • Identify main idea of text and paragraphs • Identifying and supporting theme • Sequencing • Predicting • Comparing/contrasting • Cause/effect • Problem/solution • Summarizing • Identifying author’s purpose • Identifying author’s techniques • Inferring meanings of words from context • Identifying character traits, feelings and motives • Analyzing relationships • Drawing conclusions • Analyzing to infer motive • Interpreting poetry Speaking and writing instruction will focus on strengthening English language conventions as well as practice with expository writing based on graphic organizers. The acquisition of academic language will be targeted in order to support the development of cohesive conversations around the strategic skills targeted above. Research shows that developing academic language verbally precedes utilizing it in writing. Specific writing for the ELA will also be highlighted starting with structuring sentences into well-crafted paragraphs and continuing with providing practice citing evidence from the text to back up their analyses, inferences, arguments and conclusions. Materials will include graphic organizers and texts that are engaging, rigorous, and aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS). 2018-19 CEP 55  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Teachers will be providing direct instruction through the Parallel and Alternate models for teaching and flexible groupings. Student materials will be supplemental (only used for the after school and Saturday academy) for the after school and Saturday Academy. Pearson, I'm Learning English, Pearson, Backpack, and Thinking Maps will be utilized along with online software programs: Brainpop and Mobymax to target reading skills and phonetics. Rosters and attendance records will be maintained by the school and kept on file in the main office. The teachers will record attendance for the program. Students are invited to the program by sending home letters/permission slips in the parent's preferred language. Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: As a true community of learners we value continual learning, refinement of our teaching skills, and expanding our knowledge base with the latest research. Our ESL teacher, Luz Gutierrez, will facilitate our Title III Professional Development Program. The professional learning will be targeted to classroom teachers as well as the teacher providing after school services. We will train teachers in topics affecting their learners including methodologies based on the latest research aligned with the Common Core Standards. This PD will support classroom teachers in strengthening the Academic Language and reading skills of their ENL students. The program will be comprised of two 90-minute sessions to be held after school. Our ESL teacher will attend full day workshops provided by Brooklyn North at no cost to the Title III program on 9/17/18, 10/17/18, 12/5/18, 1/16/19, 2/13/19, and 3/6/19. The workshops will focus on the work of Nonie Lesaux and her book, Cultivating Knowledge, Building Language, which highlights many of the aspects of Advanced Literacy critical to strengthen the instructional core for ELLs. She will also district and borough level clinics on topics such as Strengthening Teaching Practices for ELLs, The Challenge of Learning Academic English, and RTI for ELLs. Educational Consultants from C.I.T.E ) Center for Integrated Teacher Education will be paid to provide a series professional development session to our teachers "Strategies for English Language Learners: Academic Language, Scaffolding and Text Complexity". The C.I.T.E. (Center for Intergrated Training and Education) Consultant is a retired NYC DOE supervisor/staff developer from the company. There will be four sessions, one per month on a Monday afternoon beginning in January 2019 and ending in April 2019. The cost of the sessions will be $1,237 from our Title III budget. Our ESL teacher will turn-key methodologies based on the latest research. Topics will include Differentiating Reading and Writing Instruction for ELLs, Strengthening Skills Using English Language Conventions, Helping ELLs Write Expository Essays Based on Graphic Organizers and The NYSESLAT; an Overview. Professional development for ELL students is integrated into all professional development given to teachers in each content area. Twice per month on Monday afternoons, professional development for 1 hour. Total of 20 sessions from September 2018-19 CEP 56  Part C: Professional Development 2018 through June 2019, 40 hours. Records are maintained with agendas, and attendance sheets which are kept on file in the main office and the ESL teacher's classroom files. Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: 1. The Parental Engagement activities will be held on a monthly basis from October 2018 through June 2019 for a total of 9 sessions (October 9, November 13, November 20, December 11, January 8, February 11, March 12, March 19, April 9). Each session will be one and one-half hours in duration. The rationale for the session will be to provide family members of our English Language Learners with the highest quality information available on topics affecting their children based on a needs analysis from parent surveys and feedback. They will be introduced to the Common Core Standards and NYSESLAT. Topics will include Understanding the Common Core Standards, NYSESLAT Analysis, Helping your ELL Child Learn English, and Reading Strategies to Help Your Children at Home. Parents will be notified of this session through letters sent home via backpack in parents' preferred home language, and posted on our school website. Title III funding will be used to purchase materials and light snacks and refreshments for the parents attending the sessions. Records will be maintained with attendance sheets, agendas, as well as invitations in parents' preferred language. These records will be maintained in the main office as well as in the ESL teacher's classroom files. 2. PS 31 has an active Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) that is supportive of our school. At regularly attended PTA meetings various issues concerning the school and the community are discussed. We provide translation services for parents who do not speak English during our PTA meetings. Notices are sent home in parents' preferred language. All parents, including parents of ESL students are integral members of our school community at PS 31. Together, parents and staff work together to provide the best possible education for our students. We support a climate that values and supports parents, welcoming them to our school. Parents are informed of all school events by our website, newsletters, notices, conferences and phone calls. They are kept up to date on their child’s progress. They are provided with report cards and progress reports. They are encouraged to communicate with their child’s teacher and attend Parent-Teacher Conferences. These conferences provide open and honest communication about student progress. We provide translation services for parents who do not speak English during conferences. The teacher provides ways in which parents can assist students at home in areas of difficulty. It is with the encouragement and support of the parents that we often see improved student performance. Teachers maintain close contact with parents through individual conferences, newsletter, our school website, email and telephone. Our bilingual staff is utilized to translate conferences, messages and concerns in Spanish and Polish. These two languages comprise 83% of our English Language Learner population. Parent volunteers are also utilized 2018-19 CEP 57  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities to help form a strong school/home relationship between our school and the families of students who speak Bengali, Urdu and Japanese. Additionally, the DOE Translation/Interpretation Unit is also used for over the phone consultation when necessary. 3. Our school and our Parent Coordinator partners with other Community Based Organizations to provide workshops to parents including parents of ELL students. Food Bank NYC provides CookShop workshops to parents including parents of ELL students. These organizations provide outreach to our ELL parents to ensure they have access to health care, and family support, such as the Puerto Rican Family Institute. Bi-monthly guest speakers are invited to inform parents on various issues such as health care, nutrition, physical fitness, current events and areas of interest to the parents. They also discuss what is going on in the school and have the opportunity to voice their concerns. We also use paid consultants from C.I.T.E. (Center for Integrated Teacher Education) for parent workshops on parenting skills, academic skills and assessment. There will be a total of six, 2 hour workshops in December, January, February and March. The topics for the December workshop: Helping Your Child Succeed in School, and Anger Management and Conflict Resolution. January: Internet Safety, and Homework Without Tears. February: Maximizing Your Parent Teacher Conference. March: Dealing With Test Anxiety, Additional workshops will be given to parents on topics including the NYSESLAT and its modalities, the importance of parents reading to students in their first or second languages, as well as Understanding the Common Core Standards are covered. An ESL lending library is available to parents to encourage parents to read to their children and children to read to their parents. Our feedback and survey results on parental involvement activities have shown that our activities do address the needs of the parents. Our parents are involved in school events, PTA meetings, conferences and workshops. The attendance is high at our meetings and workshops. Our parents want to be involved and give back to the school as well. Our annual "Potluck Dinner" is always a big success for families of ELLs. All our PS 31 families bring home-cooked dishes to school to share their culture with students teachers and staff. Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. N/A Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits) N/A - Conceptually Consolidated  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. N/A Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental. N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 CEP 58  Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 CEP 59  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 14 School Name Samuel F. Dupont Borough Brooklyn School Number 031 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Mary J. Scarlato Coach type here ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Luz Gutierrez Teacher/Subject Area Teacher/Subject Area Related-Service Provider Superintendent Alicja Winnicki Assistant Principal Stacey Berger Coach type here School Counselor Parent Olivia Tharp Parent Coordinator Alvita Echevarria Field Support Center Staff Member Other (Name and Title) C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 1 1 1 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 1 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 1 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 513 2018-19 CEP 60 Total number of ELLs 51 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 9.94%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 1 2 3 4 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? The tool PS 31 uses to assess the early literacy skills of our ELL students is the Fountas and Pinnell Assessment.. Analysis of kindergarten data shows a 4% gain over three years. The data shows that 70% of our kindergarten ELLs are reading on level in the spring of 2017. Of the students who did not meet their benchmarks, the area of difficulty of decoding has been identified. ENL instruction will focus on this area. Analysis of the most recent data for grades 1 – 2 shows that the majority of our learners make steady progress meeting their benchmarks. Only 10% of students were below level on the spring Fountas and Pinnell assessment. ELLs take a bit longer than their monolingual peers and benefit from our push-in ENL program which provides instruction tailored to their needs as they progress in developing the skills needed to meet their MOSL (Measure of Student Learning) benchmarks. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? 2018-19 CEP 61  Teachers receive ongoing training on administration of Fountas and Pinnell Assessments. Data is analyzed three times a year and action plans are put into place. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? We evaluate the success of our ENL program based on our students’ progress in making gains in moving through the proficiency levels as measured by NYSESLAT, as well as our ELL students and F-ELL students achieving levels 3 & 4 in ELA, Mathematics, and Science. We have a rigorous core academic program, provide interventions and extra-curricular programs that support our ELL students with cognitive development, and academic skills so that they succeed in all subject areas. We check on their progress at regular intervals and add additional supports as needed. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? Summative data is analyzed during Inquiry meetings such as Monday afternoon professional learning, as well as during grade level Inquiry Team Meetings, and in PLC's. After data is analyzed, action plans are created and curriculum plans are adapted for intervention lessons. Students are grouped by proficiency levels and specific skills and weaknesses are targeted during instruction. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] As evidenced by our data, we have a wide range of ELL students on each of the ENL proficiency levels, including students who are at-risk for academic difficulties. We utilize the Rti Universal screening, degree of proficiency in English as well as taking into consideration the students’ cultural and linguistic backgrounds t guide instruction for the ELL students in grades K-5. After the baseline Universal screening (to assess whether his/her literacy skills are meeting benchmark grade level competency) strong Tier 1 instruction is provided in the classroom. Moby Max is a computer program we use for intervention. Intensive targeted intervention is provided to support ELLs who are not showing sufficient progress on the skills measured. Achieve 3000 is used for progress monitoring. Progress monitoring data is used to make decisions and action plans are created for student improvement. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. Forty-nine students were administered the NYSESLAT and/or NYSITELL in 2015. Fifteen (30.6%) of those tested scored at the Entering and Emerging levels, while twenty-six students (56%) scored at the Transitioning and Expanding levels. Eight students were proficient at the Commanding level which is 16.3%. The data reveals that the language proficiency level in kindergarten students are at the lower levels. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? Data is analyzed during grade level inquiry team meetings, and Monday afternoon professional learning. Action plans are made and revisited as progress is monitored. Adjustments to action plans are made regularly as the data from the action plans are analyzed. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. 2018-19 CEP 62  In order to meet the linguistic needs of our ELLs as well as comply with parental choice and CR Part 154, PS 31 provides push-in and integrated services. We utilize the push in model because it is the most effective model for allowing students to receive language support while learning the core curriculum. This allows for effective implementation of the CCLS using multiple entry points. Data is culled from various sources including ECLAS results, NYSESLAT results, Periodic Assessments, school and classroom tests as well as teacher observation. Groups are formed based on students' NYSESLAT proficiency level. b. TBE program. If applicable. N/A c. DL program. If applicable. N/A 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? Students performing at the Entering level receive 360 minutes of ENL instruction which includes 180 minutes of Standalone ENL and 180 minutes of integrated ENL/ELAinstruction by a certified ESL Teacher as per CR Part 154. Students at the Emerging level receive 360 minutes of ENL instruction which includes 180 minutes of Standalone ENL, 180 minutes of integrated ENL/ELA by a certified ESL Teacher. Transitioning students receive 180 minutes total which includes 90 minutes of ENL instruction and 90 minutes of integrated ENL/ELA by a certified ESL Teacher. Expanding students receive 180 minutes total instruction which includes 180 minutes using the integrated ENL/ELA model by a certified ESL Teacher. Commanding students receive 90 minutes of integrated ENL/ELA or other content area by a certified ESL Teacher. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. Our ELL students’ instruction is based on the same rigorous curriculum as our native English speaking students. However, we include many supports to prepare ELL students and to foster language development, solve problems and meet the challenges presented by the Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS). Our reading lessons involve multiple entry points to help ELLs meet the Common Core Learning Standards. During each reading lesson vocabulary is taught, multiple reads and close reading of complex text is focused on. This careful and purposeful reading and rereading of a passage, where students really focus on what the author had to say; what the author’s purpose was, what the words mean, and what the structure of the text tells. The teacher models focusing on words, ideas, structure, flow, and purpose of the text in a away that readies ELLs to answer more complex questions and compare these ideas with what they arleady know. Additional examples include writing a text based written response daily. Students are required to cite text evidence to justify their thinking. Students are provided a rubric to assess their response. We utilize Go Math, which is aligned wth the CCLS. Teachers scaffold academic language to support students’ participation in content areas. A rich repertoire of scaffolds is used to support students’ understanding of the main academic content through multiple entry points. CCLS discussion techniques are employed to support the development of academic language. Research-based ESL strategies are utilized to foster vocabulary development. Resources and materials include a wide range of print, visual and technological resources to enhance English proficiency. Language functions and structures are taught within the context of the lessons. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? Students whose native language is Spanish are administered the the Spanish LAB. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status a. At this time, we have no students who meet the criteria for SIFE designation. Should we receive any new admits that meet this criteria, we would provide extra support as an extension of the regular school program for SIFE students. SIFE students would come to our after school program two days a week and work with the ESL teacher on skills tailored to their unique and individual needs. The ESL teacher would work with the classroom and content area teachers as a team to develop student goals and review progress on a regular basis. b. When a new student arrives at our school, we provide the following to help ease their transition and prepare students who are mandated to take NYS ELA tests. • They are given a “study-buddy” who uses the same native language. • Their parents are encouraged to sign them up for the Saturday Academy and Extended Day ESL Program. • Learning Resources (In School and At Home): Lexia, LeapPads, Bilingual electronic dictionaries, books on tape, and talking monolingual electronic dictionaries. • Home School Connection c. We have one student who has been receiving ESL services for 4 years. • Their parents are encouraged to sign them up for the Extended Day ESL Program to receive extra support for test preparation for students taking NYS Assessments in the content areas and ELA. • Wilson Reading Program • Learning Resources (In School and At Home): Lexia, onemorestory.com, Word Q, LeapPads, Bilingual electronic dictionaries, books on tape, symphonylearning.com • Home School Connection Many supports from both the classroom teacher and ESL teacher are utilized to support ELL students to think critically, solve problems and communicate in English. The ESL teacher consults with classroom teachers as well as other service providers in order to allow for further differentiation of instruction. Teachers scaffold academic language to support students’ participation in content areas. A rich repertoire of scaffolds is used to support students’ understanding of the main academic content. Academic language is modeled in ways in which students are expected to respond and participate. Resources and materials include a wide range of print, visual and technological resources to enhance English proficiency. Language functions and structures are taught within the context of the lessons. 2018-19 CEP 63  d. At this time, we have no students who are Long Term ELLs. Should we receive any new admits who meet this criteria, our action plan would include: • Targeted small group intervention/instruction targeting reading and writing during class. • Extended day/ after school program and Saturday program for intensive ELA instruction targeting reading and writing. • Monitoring the progress of students in all content areas to differentiate instruction. • Learning Resources (In School and At Home): Lexia, onemorestory.com, Word Q, LeapPads, Bilingual electronic dictionaries, books on tape, symphonylearning.com and RAZ Kids.com • Home School Connection e. For at least two years following the school year in which a student is exited from ELL status, former ELLs receive at least one half of one unit of study of English as a new language (90 minutes per week) and are eligible for certain specified testing accommodations; time and a half on all standardized assessments. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? A wide variety of instructional strategies are used including small group task oriented instruction, digital resources, as well as a wide range of scaffolds. Materials include an ESL Lending Library which has native language texts available in addition to a wide range of classroom texts, Ipads, computers, LeapPads, tape recorders, CD players, Califones, electronic bilingual and monolingual talking dictionaries. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? At present, we have 6 students with special needs who are receiving ESL services. ESL instruction is geared to provide support for these learners in accordance with needs identified in their Individualized Educational Plans. The ESL teacher consults with classroom teachers as well as other service providers in order to effectively utilize multiple entry points in the least restrictive environment. The diverse needs of our ELLs who have disabilities are met through push-in model. Students are grouped by their level of proficiency according to data culled from school-wide assessment results, NYSESLAT results, Periodic Assessments, school and teacher assessments. Evidence of student progress is provided by ongoing assessment. Assessments may indicate a need for mid-course changes. Students strengths and weaknesses in listening, speaking, reading and writing are analyzed to determine curriculum, plan instruction and scheduling. In addition, the ESL teacher is familiar with each particular students' needs via IEP and all services are provided according to the IEP mandates. Progress is monitored and discussed between the ESL teacher, IEP teacher and other providers. The curriculum is focused on ELLs acquiring Academic Language by providing authentic opportunities for students. Teaching academic words within context of engaging text as well as through engagement with tasks that require discussion with peers. Teachers adjust Lexile levels to support text complexity. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. Intervention programs target ELLs in ELA, math and other content areas who achieve a level1 and a low level 2 on assessments such as baseline MOSLs, NYS ELA, NYS Math, NYS Science, and classroom assessments in Social Studies. Services are offered in English and include a variety of programs and strategies including Fundations Reading, Close Reading with purpose strategies before, during and after reading in ELA. In Math, explicit and systematic instruction is paired with the use of representation techniques in strategic AIS groupings in the classroom. Academic and content vocabulary is targeted in science and social studies.Intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, Math, Science and Social Studies: • Targeted small group push-in intervention from content area and/or ESL teacher. • Extended day/after school program and for intensive instruction targeting areas of need. • Monitoring the progress of students in areas of need to develop action plans and provide multiple entry points. • Learning Resources (In School and At Home): Lexia, onemorestory.com, Word Q, LeapPads, Bilingual electronic dictionaries, books on tape, Max Scholar 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? Our future plans for our ENL program will be based on the needs of our ELL students and will be modified accordingly. Being that we have a large population in grades K-2, we plan on utilizing ESL methodologies and language support in our instructional program to support language acquisition and academic growth. We will utilize our funding to purchase additional learning resources such as Wilson Reading/Fundations materials and Lexia software to accommodate a larger population of younger students. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? PS 31 will not be discontinuing programs/services for ELLs. We will continue to support them through any program that is chosen by parents. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. Our ELL population also has full access to all after-school and supplementary programs including the Extended Day Program, Saturday Academy and Enrichment Programs. Our enrichment programs include Small Bites, Cookshop, Ballroom Dance, Ballet, Eckford Street Art, Studio in a School, and the 92nd Street Y Musical Introduction Series. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. Instructional materials include the ReadyGen program and varied trade books, books on tape, picture and photo files, Getting Ready for the New NYSESLAT, (Attanasio & Assoc.) as well as Continental Press Empire State NYSESLAT. Students are supported using technology which includes software and online learning including Lexia Learning. Students are also provided with Ipads, computers, LeapPads, tape recorders, and electronic bilingual dictionaries for use at home and in school. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Books in many of the students’ native languages are available to support instruction as well as for use at home. The use of electronic bilingual dictionaries and LeapPads support the transfer of native language learning to English. Native language is also supported through our ESL Lending Library. 2018-19 CEP 64  14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. The ELL services correspond to students’ ages and grade levels. ELL students are grouped by grade level, then NYSESLAT proficiency level. Students are serviced for the appropriate amount of minutes per week. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? Instructional materials include the ReadyGen program and varied trade books, books on tape, picture and photo files, Getting Ready for the New NYSESLAT, (Attanasio & Assoc.) as well as Continental Press’ Empire State NYSESLAT. Students are supported using technology which includes software and online learning including Achieve 3000, MyOn, News-O-Matic, MobyMax, and BrainPop. Students are also provided with Ipads, computers, LeapPads, tape recorders, and electronic bilingual dictionaries for use at home and in school. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). Students and their families who register before the beginning of the school year are given handouts and materials in their native language to familiarize themselves with the school, grade level standards and programs offered, such as the Early Morning Program. Students and families will be offered a tour of the school whenever possible. Students and their families will be introduced to the ESL teacher during the interview process as well as when as school begins. Our school follows the same procedure for families who enroll when the school year is in progress. All families of eligible students will receive an invitation to a Parent Orientation Session. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? We are an elementary school, and do not offer language elective classes. 18. For schools with dual language programs: In which language(s) is each core content area taught? a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? As per parent choice, at this time, we do not offer dual language programs. Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? As a true community of learners we value continual learning, refinement of our teaching skills, and expanding our knowledge base with the latest research. Our school provides professional development to all teachers, paraprofessionals and administrators that specifically addresses the needs of English language learners. A minimum of fifteen percent of the required professional development hours for all teachers prescribed by CR Part 80 must be dedicated to language acquisition, including a focus on best practices for co-teaching strategies and integrating language and content instruction for English language learners. For our English as a New Language teacher, a minimum of fifty percent of the required professional development hours must be dedicated to language acquisition in alignment with core content area instruction, including a focus on best practices for co-teaching strategies and integrating language and content instruction for English language learners. Teachers meet regularly during common planning, vertical and inquiry meetings to analyze student work, develop next steps and adjust curriculum to ultimately increase student performance. Lead teachers model outstanding lessons and strategies. Professional development is offered in-house as well as inter-school visitations and district workshops. Professional development is based on teachers’ needs and interests as well as on topics such as the use of Co-Teaching Models, Multiple Entry Points, Analyzing Data/Looking at Student Work Using the ATLAS protocol, Reciprocal Teaching, Deepening Student Discussions, Formative Assessment, Student Discourse in Math, and Scaffolding Instruction for English Language Learners. Our ENL teacher is also sent to workshops given outside of our school by District 14 and the Division of English Language Learners. Calendars are available at http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/Educator Resources/Professional+Development.htm. Topics include Thinking Maps, Scaffolding Instruction for ELLs within Ready Gen and content area units, The ELL Identification Process, and English Language Learners with Special Needs; What You Need to Know. At the school level, the ENL teacher will turn-key professional development during (Monday) Professional Development sessions on an ongoing basis, including November 3, 2015. In addition, consultants are hired to provide professional learning. 2018-19 CEP 65  Teachers of ELLs are included in the professional development. ELLs take part in the same CCLS curriculum with scaffolding and supports. Teachers receive professional development in Scaffolding Instruction for ELLs, Accountable Talk, Close Reading and Text Complexity. They receive professional development that is aligned to the CCLS and the shift in Reading and Math instruction. Our ENL teacher attends District 14 and OELL professional development sessions. Topics include Thinking Maps, Scaffolding Instruction for ELLs within ReadyGen and content area units, The ELL Identification Process, and English Language Learners with Special Needs; What You Need to Know. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. Our guidance counselor works with our ELLs as they transition to middle school. She assists them by providing information on middles schools that have comprehensive programs for ELLs. Our school provides professional development to all teachers, paraprofessionals and administrators that specifically addresses the needs of English language learners. A minimum of fifteen percent of the required professional development hours for all teachers prescribed by CR Part 80 must be dedicated to language acquisition, including a focus on best practices for co-teaching strategies and integrating language and content instruction for English language learners. For English as a new language teachers, a minimum of fifty percent of the required professional development hours must be dedicated to language acquisition in alignment with core content area instruction, including a focus on best practices for co-teaching strategies and integrating language and content instruction for English language learners.Professional development is based on teachers’ needs and interests as well as on topics such as the use of Co-Teaching Models, Multiple Entry Points, Analyzing Data/Looking at Student Work, and Scaffolding Instruction for English Language Learners. Our ENL teacher is also sent to workshops given outside of our school by District 14 and the Division of English Lanuage Learners. Topics include Thinking Maps, Scaffolding Instruction for ELLs within ReadyGen and content area units, The ELL Identification Process, and English Language Learners with Speical Needs; What You Need to Know. Professional development is provided by school staff. The focus of our professional development program is based on improving the literacy needs of our ELL population and aligning instruction to CCSS. The main thrust of our focus is on Co-Teaching Models, Multiple Entry Points, Close Reading, Text Complexity, Developing Academic Vocabulary and Scaffolding Instruction for English Language Learners. Professional development is also given on the use of technology – Lexia, Leap Pad, utilizing the ELL component of Ready Gen to scaffold instruction. Professional development will be geared for all personnel who work directly with ELLs, including the assistant principal, classroom teachers, cluster teachers, paraprofessionals and guidance counselors. Also included will be support staff: occupational therapists, speech therapists, secretaries and the parent coordinator. Topics will include Second Language Acquisition, Descriptions of Proficiency Levels, Scaffolding Strategies, ESL Methodologies and The Bilingual Home. Records will be kept utilizing meeting agendas and attendance sheets. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? Our ENL Teacher, Luz Gutierrez, meets with the parents or guardians of English language learners at least once a year, in addition to parent-teacher conferences, initial parent orientations, quarterly progress meetings or other scheduled meetings provided for parents or guardians, to discuss the goals of the program, their child’s language development progress, their child’s English language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas. This additional meeting includes the classroom teacher, the ENL teacher and any other service provides necessary to sufficiently inform the parents or guardians about their child’s language development in all content areas in English. This meeting is conducted with a qualified interpreter/translator in the language or mode of communication the parent or guardian best understands. These meeting take place during parent engagement time on Tuesday afternoons. Staff members who speak Spanish and Polish are on-hand. For other languages we call the DOE Translation Unit as needed. 2018-19 CEP 66  2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. PS 31 has an active Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) who support our school. Our parent co-ordinator plays an integral role in fostering parental involvement. At regularly attended PTA meetings various issues concerning the school and the community are discussed. Activities include a fall festival, holiday show, fifth grade trip to Adventure Land, and spring festival. We provide translation services for parents who do not speak English during our PTA meetings. Parents of ELLs are encouraged to volunteer and get involved in these activities. All parents , including parents of ELLs, are encouraged to be a guest for Fabulous Fridays to share an interest, skill, or talent with their child's class. All parents, including parents of ENL students are integral members of our school community at PS 31. Together, parents and staff work together to provide the best possible education for our students. We support a climate that values and supports parents, welcoming them to our school. Parents are informed of all school events by newsletters, notices, conferences and phone calls. Additionally, the school maintains a website (content on website can be translated into 60 languages), which gives parents access to details regarding what events are going on in the school. Parents are kept up to date on their child’s progress by their classroom and ESL teachers. Parents are provided with report cards and encouraged to communicate with their child’s teacher and attend Parent-Teacher Conferences. These conferences provide open and honest communication about student progress. We provide translation services by a qualified interpreter for parents who do not speak English during conferences. The teacher provides ways in which parents can assist students at home in areas of difficulty. It is with the encouragement and support of the parents that we often see improved student performance. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Paste response here: 2018-19 CEP 67 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Mary J. Scarlato, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 CEP 68  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: Samuel F. Dupont School DBN: 14K031 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Mary Scarlato Title Principal Stacey Berger Assistant Principal Alvita Echevarria Parent Coordinator Luz Gutierrez ENL/Bilingual Teacher Parent Teacher/Subject Area Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach School Counselor Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 06/19/2017 06/19/2017 06/19/2017 06/19/2017 2018-19 CEP 69  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 14K031 School Name: P.S. 31 Samuel F. Dupont Elementary Superintendent: Alicja Winicki The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this (*Primary) conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. New incoming students are interviewed at registration so that accurate language information can be collected. Individualized language information on students is included on yearly updated blue Emergency cards as well as on Student Cumulative records. We also conduct an assessment of written and oral translation needs by surveying our staff members and school community. These surveys include input from teachers, administrators, paraprofessionals, secretaries, school aides, parent coordinator and members of the PTA. Our PTA discusses written/oral translation and interpretation services during PTA meetings. Our findings are also presented during School Leadership Team meetings. Findings suggest that we need Spanish and Polish language written translation of correspondence home, including parent handbook, After-School Programs, Parent Workshops, and Testing Calendars, as well as our school website at www.ps31brooklyn.com has 65 different languages available for translation. Our findings also suggest that we need oral translation services during our four Parent Teacher conferences, ENL Orientations, and Parent Workshops. 2018-19 CEP 70  2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Parents' preferred languages for both written and oral communication include the following: English, Spanish, Polish, Bengali, Urdu, Japanese and Italian. 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency How do you Distributed to Families plan to translate? Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. Annual Handook -- once a year Discipline Code -- once a year Newletters -- monthly Calendars -- monthly Parent Teacher Conference Announcements -- 4 times per year (September, November, March and May New York Testing Dates After-School Program Information Letter from School Leadership -- periodically throughout the year 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. 2018-19 CEP 71  Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide interpretation service(s)? Our school hosts four Parent Teacher Conferences throughout the year. These include the following 1. Curriculum Night -- September 17, 2015 2. Parent Teacher Conferences -- November 4-5, 2015 3. Parent-Teacher Conferences -- March 2-3, 2016 4. Curriculum Night -- May 12, 2016 Face-to-face meetings with parents also include IEP Triennials and Annuals, and ELL Orientation. When we schedule meetings, we ask parents beforehand about their language needs and provide translation services using bilingual school staff members whenever possible. If we have no staff members available with a specific language proficiency, we utilize the Translation & Interpretation Unit of the DOE. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) In order to disseminate vital information to non-English speaking parents and to encourage participation in their children's education, we will: 1. Post a sign in each of the covered languages in our main office specifying that written notification can be obtained from the main office. We will instruct parents of their rights and how to obtain such services. 2018-19 CEP 72  2. Address language interpretation procedures in the school safety plan. 3. Notify parents that further information can be obtained on the DOE website at www.schools.nyc.gov. 4. Consider scheduling a focus group of parents representing all cultures of our student body in order to gather feedback and best practices for disseminating vital information as well as encouraging participation in their children's education. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? We will be monitoring our effectiveness in the quality and availablility of services through parent surveys, face-to-face interactions, parent workshops, as well as through PTA meetings. Feedback and results will be evaluated at School Leadership Team meetings to ensure that all ELL parents' needs are being met. 2018-19 CEP 73 
