2018-19 COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (CEP-CS) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 15K038 School Name: P.S. 038 THE PACIFIC Principal: PASCALE PRADEL 2018-19 CEP-CS 1  Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 CEP 2  Section 1: School Information Page School Information School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: The Pacific School 0000000 Pre K- 5 450 Pacific Street 718 330 9305 Phone Number: School Number (DBN): 15K038 718 8039542 Fax: Dr. Yolanda Ramirez yramire4@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Geographical District: 15 Superintendent’s Office Address: Email Address: Yolanda Ramirez Laura Chzascz Suzanne Linquist Yvette Williams N/A N/A N/A N/A District Information Anita Skop Superintendent: 131 Livingston Street Askop@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718-9354317 Phone Number: 7189354356 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) 2018-19 CEP 3  BrooklynNorth Bernadette Fitzgerald FSC: Executive Director’s Office Address: Executive Director: 110 Livingston Street, Brooklyn, NY 11201 BFitze2@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 718 935-3954 Phone Number: 718 935-2382 Fax: 2018-19 CEP 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) PascalePradel Laura Chzasczc Suzzanne Linquist Oconner n/a NA n/a n/a n/a Melonie Frances Ben Richardson *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Parent Parent Parent 2018-19 CEP 5  Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Cheryl McKenzie Naida Fernandez Kimberly Crowther Joanna Schlesser Yvette Joseph Teacher Teacher Teacher Parent Parent/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ 2018-19 CEP 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with 2018-19 CEP 7  the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement 2018-19 CEP 8  Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 1. What is your school’s mission statement? The Vision Section 4: CEP Overview The Pacific School is a school of the arts that strives through partnerships to develop well rounded thinkers and to support the whole child through guidance and autonomy in an environment where everyone is able to achieve and excel. 2018-19 CEP 9  2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. The school is housed in Boerum Hill Brooklyn nestled between The Wycoff Houses and Brownstones respectively. The Pacific School is an elementary school with 568 students from pre-kindergarten through grade 5. The school population comprises 37% Black, 24% Hispanic, 18% White, and 18% Asian students. The student body includes54% English language learners and 21% special education students. Boys account for 49% of the students enrolled and girls account for 51%. The average attendance rate for the school year 2017-2018 was 93%. It is a school of the arts, working in collaboration with several CBO’s including; Arts Connection, Steel Pans, Mark Morris, Noel Pointer violin, SABA Soccer Music and the Brain . The school also offers an array of enrichment opportunities led by classroom teachers including: basketball, Spanish cooking, , tap, jazz. Lyrical, classical chorus, pop chorus, drumming, STEM, Photography, Science and arts and crafts. Special initiatives that support the development of our early learners include; block building, Lego challenge, Imagination Playground and Research for elementary school students.Our school has experienced growth in student achievement with 54% of our students passing the ELA State Exam and 53% of our students passing the Math State Exam. We also celebrate continued success with Teacher Collaboration and teacher teams. Structures such as lab-sites, mentoring, and common planning ensure a strong professional learning community. Strong family and community ties are developed with programs such as: Monthly Community Conversations, Night at the Museum overnight, Club Getaway, Intrepid, parent engagement, and Informational sessions . School- wide events such as the Carnival, Spring/Fall Music and Dance shows, Curriculum Highlight Day and Musical Theatre Show. Community Schools also offers: sculpture for kindergarten, visual arts for grade 2 and a host of trips for children. These organizations in collaboration with the school administration, help to promote a strong school , community and family connection. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. We're continuing to work toward moving our SWD to least restrictive environments. Special education students are also in need in social emotional support, particularly students classified as ED or OD. In the area of academics, students appear to remain stronger in mathematics instead of ELA. Additional resources, including explicit reading instruction through guided reading in ELA and increase will be available to support these students with the support of the Community Schools Grant Funding utilizing Socio-Emotional organizations such as Bank St Emotionally Responsive Practice. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. The school has deepened instructional practices across all classrooms to ensure that all students are evenly challenged to take part in high order thinking and rich discussion. A variety of common assessments well aligned to the school’s chosen curricula, including running records, performance assessments, unit assessments in content areas, rubric assessed writing and grade level assessments in English language arts and math, provide teachers and the school with data to analyze and identify trends and student needs at frequent intervals throughout the year. The school has also started improving student analytical, language and discussion skills through the implementation of a school research program. Improving student discussion, analytical and critical thinking skills remains a key focus for our community. Independent and group research will offer our students strong opportunities to engage in rich discussion, critical thinking and debate with one another. The infusion of the research program has also improved evidence based student writing across subject areas which continues to be an ongoing area of focus.. 2018-19 CEP 10  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 15K038 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration PK,0K,01,02,03,04,05 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 574 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 54 53 8 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 32 33 17 17 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 51.0% % Attendance Rate 47.0% % Reduced Lunch 6.6% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.2% 21.3% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 24.4% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 12.08 2% 19% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 63.3% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 95% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A YES N/A NO YES Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A NO N/A NO YES Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A YES High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 18 18 93.0% 3.1% 13.9% 29.4% 18.8% 6.1% 0 7% 5.2 62.4% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No YES YES N/A N/A YES YES YES N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 CEP 11  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Since our last quality review in 2016-2017, our school has been focusing on student engagement in the classroom. As a community, we have also worked heavily in the area of questioning, discussion and debate. They have sense of autonomy, enjoy working in teams and have learned to take ownership of their learning both individually and in teams. With the support of the classroom teacher, students engage in high levels of student thinking and group participation. In our most recent State scores from 2016-2017, 54% of students met State standards in the area of English Language Arts. As we focused on mastering questioning, student engagement, discussion and debate, our data showed that we considered other data results. This included the fact that our students needed support with main idea, character analysis and inference. These areas continue to be a trend in grades 3, 4 and 5. Our Special Education population in particular, continue to score at 50% or less across all 12:1:1 classes. A focus on our Special Education population is necessary for the year 2018-2019. A more in-depth evaluation, particularly of students in the 12:1:1 setting, must be done to determine their developmental ability to perform on the New York State examinations. Additional needs for the special education population, include ensuring that they continue to have access to technology for instructional and research purposes. Books of literary merit should also be infused into the classroom setting. Although our school hosts a Service Provider morning for Students with disabilities, the trend has shown limited participation from our parents. Community schools can support a stronger family presence in the 2018-2019 school year, by hosting special time specifically for Special Education students and their families. A school priority has to be one that links the connection of those families to the school, and the school curriculum. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Commencing in September 2018 and ending in June 2019, 100% of students in grades K through 5 will participate in the process of research based learning using multiple forms of research methods. The research process will provide students with English Language Arts skills including; organizing, analyzing and synthesizing information from multiple sources. 2018-19 CEP 12  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). A Research Committee, as well as other instructional staff and school administrators will work together to further develop the research program in grades K through 5. Professional Development will be offered to meet the needs of educators and their various levels of development in facilitating classroom student-led research, including use of technology such as Google Docs, Google Slides, Prezi and OWL. Selected literature and webinars will be used to support staff on effective techniques to conduct productive discussion, student presentations, inquiry and research methods. Students with disabilities and English Learners will utilize strategies to help scaffold the learning to produce effective discussion through the process of inquiry and research. The ENL teacher and Individual Educational Plan teachers will support students and staff accordingly. Weekly parent engagement sessions, monthly Community Conversations, Common Core workshops and Curriculum Night are offered to families to learn about the strategies that support the process of student inquiry, research, technology and use of multiple sources. A select group of children involved in Research Fridays may present their research to the Research Committee. Parents are invited to attend the end of the year celebration. Research Fridays are implemented for students to use the Media Center and work on research for a topic of their choice. Students may work alone, in pairs or in small groups. Research will be presented to their class/grade/other grades. Our students will continue to work on deeper and more in-depth discussion. Students may also present their research to the Research Committee. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Sept.- 2018 June 2019 Administration, Research Team Teachers, Classroom Teachers Teacher Teams Classroom Teachers Teachers Sept– 2018 June-2019 Administration, Teachers, IEP Specialist, and ENL Teacher Families Monthly, on Mondays Sept. 2018 Administration, Parent Coordinator, Teachers June-2019 Students Administration, Teachers Every Friday from Sept. 2018-June 2019 2018-19 CEP 13  How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. We will continue to use weekly parent engagement time, Common Core workshops and Curriculum Night to engage and support our parents in methods to support their children at home. Administration, Parent Coordinator, and classroom teachers will plan events to provide parents with information to assist and support their children Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Ready Gen curriculum Select Science, Historical and other non-fiction texts based on student interest Teacher leaders to plan and provide professional development in the area of research     Teachers and administration will develop lab sites to highlight best practices in the area of research, discussion and presentation.  Common planning time to promote teacher instructional planning  Mac Lab will provide children an opportunity to use computers and/or tablets to complete their research Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind X Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. The measurement of student achievement will be done in multiple ways. Students will sit with teams of teachers to discuss their research, their learning process and the outcomes of their work. Students will also present their information in multiple forms, including PowerPoint, Google and Prezi, and present their information to teacher teams for the purpose of evaluating students learning. Students will be evaluated using a rubric that outlines several key areas: speaking, writing, presentation development and organization, research clarity and style. Further evaluation will be done using questions and in-depth discussion with the students pertaining to their topics. Teachers will create a portfolio of students’ work to monitor their progress from year-to-year. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) January 2019 ELA school wide assessment, State ELA scores, and TCRWP running record levels. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 14  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? The Pacific School is a diversifying school which is currently in year two as a Community School. The school population comprises 37% Black, 24% Hispanic, 18% White, and 18% Asian students. The student body includes54% English language learners and 21% special education students. Boys account for 49% of the students enrolled and girls account for 51%. The average attendance rate for the school year 2016-2017 was 93%. As a result of our work with Breaking the Cycle, we have a identified a need for teachers in all disciplines to create a more culturally responsive classroom. Part of our Community School grant includes diversity training with Breaking the Cycles consulting services. Our teachers have received four professional development sessions with Breaking the Cycles. Our parents have also received three diversity training sessions with Breaking the Cycle. Our school has also developed a schoolwide diversity team at the request of our superintendent. This diversity team includes all stakeholders (teachers, parents, administrators, Breaking the Cycle consultants, and Community School director). Each year the population of our school continues to change and diversify. A District 15 initiative is to support the diversity in the community with diversity training as well as school wide teams devoted to supporting diversity issues. Our school will also work in collaboration with the district diversity initiative and attend Border Crossing Training. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Beginning in October, 2018 and ending in June of 2019, all teachers will receive diversity training as part of their Professional Development. Teachers will work with their teacher teams to create culturally responsive classroom environments. The training will support teachers in understanding how to create equitable opportunities for learning for all students across cultural, racial and religious backgrounds. 2018-19 CEP 15  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Teachers will receive professional development in collaboration with Breaking the Cycle to enhance their understanding of teaching in a diverse classroom setting, creating at least 2 units aligned to supporting and promoting cultural sensitivity. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Teachers Oct. 2018- June 2019 Administration Town Halls will continue, providing children an opportunity to talk about topics in the school that are important to them. These topics may include student school life, bullying and respect for all. Friendship Ambassadors will be selected from each grade to facilitate this discussion. Students Teachers Parents will be invited to attend diversity workshops throughout the year. Workshops will be presented by Breaking the Cycle. School staff and members of the diversity team will also attend district wide P.D. Border Crossers. Parents Teachers, Professional Development Committee, Diversity Team Monthly, Sept. 2018 Teacher Oct. 2018-June 2019 4 sessions per /year Community Schools Administration Parent Coordinator Parents and teachers will be invited to attend a series of workshops that are aligned with the mission of the school. Parents 3 sessions Community Schools In the beginning of the year students will receive the school’s official Discipline Code of Conduct; to ensure that 100% of families are reached. Various distribution channels will be utilized. Parents and teachers are invited to join a Diversity Committee. This team will receive training in understanding and building bridges in the areas of race, culture and diversity. The team will support parents, teachers, children, and other school constituents by sharing information and supporting a school culture that embodies respect for all. Teachers Students, Parents Parents, Teachers Parent Coordinator Administration, PTA Parent Coordinator Administration Diversity Committee School Leadership Team First Week of School Trainings take place during the summer of 2018. Monthly meetings from Sept. 2018 – June 2019 2018-19 CEP 16  3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Counseling in Schools will continue to present diversity workshops to parents at a time convenient to many parents.When possible, they will provide child care services in an effort to increase parent participation. The Parent Coordinator, and Community Schools will collaborate and host events and workshops that improve school pride and active community engagement. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc.  Grant-funded Counseling in Schools/Community Schools  Parent Coordinator  Guidance Counselors Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By the end of January 2019 parents and students will be issued a mid-year survey to gauge how they feel about the programs/trainings that are being offered, and how supported they (both parents and children) feel in the school and determine if there is an increase from a beginning of the year assessment. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. We will strive to get the number of student absences above less than 5% school wide. Surveys will be presented to parents regarding what they would like to see in the school/if they feel like they and/or their children are being supported. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 17  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Currently, teachers work collaboratively and meet regularly during their common professional periods and on Monday afternoons. Teachers have expressed the importance of continuing to meet on Mondays in their teacher teams. In addition to teacher team time on Mondays, teachers select professional development throughout the year based on their individual needs. In 2018-2019, teacher teams will collaborate and decide on professional development based on a needs assessment which will be conducted by the professional development team in September, 2018. Following these results, the P.D. team will organize and provide Monday professional development in accordance with the overall results of the school wide professional needs. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. In accordance with the Chancellors a mandate for teacher professional development on Mondays, beginning in September 2018 through June of 2019, 100% of teachers participate in professional development. Teachers will select, organize and participate in ELA and Math P.D focused on closing the achievement gap for Special Education Students. The result of this professional development will improve teacher performance resulting an 10% increase in SED performance results in summative, formative and Statewide examinations. 2018-19 CEP 18  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Professional Development and Curriculum Committee will use collected data including surveys to plan and implement teacher-selected workshops and professional development opportunities All teachers, Administration and paraprofessionals Sept. 2018. - June 2019 Administration, P.D. Committee Professional Development and Curriculum Committee will work collaboratively with English Language Learners and Individualized Education Plan specialist to select targeted professional development opportunities in the areas of Students with Disabilities, English Native Learners , and other high-need student groups. Teachers will have an opportunity to select professional development in their teacher teams. The selection of the professional development will be done in collaboration with the school administration. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Teachers, Administration Sept. 2018. - June 2019 ENL Teacher, IEP Specialist, Administration Teacher Teams Sept 2018-June 2019 Teacher Teams Administration How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Beginning in September teachers will host Community Discussions and Parent Curriculum sessions to support families in understanding the work within the school setting. These discussions will take place monthly with a special session organized in February surrounding curriculum. Key personnel include, teachers, administration, family worker and community associate Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc.  Professional Literature  Teacher leaders  Administration  Professional Organizations 2018-19 CEP 19   Community Partnerships Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, 90% of all teachers and paras will have received at least one targeted professional development opportunity as indicated in the preference survey. The team will re-evaluate further p.d. needs and adjust the p.d. schedule as needed. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress.  End of year survey  Parent, teacher, and student feedback Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 20  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Since 2015 teachers have been attending targeted lab site visits in Math and ELA. Teachers have found these visits valuable in improving their practice. Lab sites provide teachers with leadership opportunities as well as an opportunity for teachers to develop skills across the different teaching domains. In the 2018-2019 school year lab sites will be expanded to include more teachers and cluster teachers. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Beginning in September 2018 through June 2019, school administration will work in collaboration with teachers to continue to develop, organize and monitor lab sites in Math, ELA, Social Studies, Science and STEM. (30% by December, 60% by March, and 100% by May) 2018-19 CEP 21  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). To continue and grow our Lab site program and offer it to the entire staff we will provide professional development on giving collegial feedback. We will also offer professional literature book/article clubs in this area. ENL and Students With Disability (SWD) teachers will become lab sites and demonstrate their various strategies that best support this population. In addition, all highly effective teachers will begin videotaping their practice to create a "mobile lab site"; a targeted skills library for review and discussion. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Teachers Sept. 2018-June 2019 Admin Teachers Teachers Sept 2018.- June 2019 Admin SWD teachers ENL teacher IEP specialist Teachers Sept. 2018 Admin June 2019 Teachers We will strengthen the efficacy of these lab sites by adding inter-visitations for cluster teachers. Teachers Sept. Admin 2018 June 2019 Teachers 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. On-going discussions led by teachers, school administration, family workers, and community associates will take place beginning in September. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 2018-19 CEP 22 Substitute teachers as well as flexible schedule   Professional Literature   Administration and teacher-led feedback  Relationships with other schools for inter-visitations Lead Teachers Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Instructional team and lead teachers hold discussions in January to assess the program. Revisions will be made in collaboration with teachers and administration to improve and enhance instructional practice in light of student academic needs. By December at least 30%, March 60%, and May 100% of teachers will have participated in at least one lab site, inter-visitation, or mobile lab site. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Record of teacher participation, teacher feedback and surveys, informal observations. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 23  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. We provide outreach to our families through Curriculum Night, parent teacher engagement, Parent Teacher conferences as well as many school wide events. However, through observation we have noticed that attendance does not represent the diversity of the community. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Beginning in September 2018 and ending in June, 2019, collaborate with Community Schools Director to enhance cultural awareness, sensitivity and improve our overall school culture and climate by collaborating with 2 new community based organizations further improving strong family and community ties by 5%. The success of this work will be measured through surveys conducted by the PTA and the results of the Learning Environment Survey. 2018-19 CEP 24  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Surveys will be assessed by our Diversity Team to analyze the needs of our parents. Parents  A step by step process will b developed to assess the Admin. Sept. 2017 to June 2018 Admin. Parent Coordinator parent needs.  An agenda will then be developed that meets the needs Teachers of our diverse population.  Parents will be encouraged to attend school wide events in order to learn how their needs will be met. Increased translated communications to our ENL families. During Parent Engagement teachers and paraprofessionals will reach out to our SWD families to ensure communication has been received. Parents Teachers Sept. 2017 to June 2018 PTA Guidance Admin. Parent Coordinator To increase involvement of diverse families at our school wide events. Parents Sept. 2017 to June Admin Parent Coordinator 2018 ENL Teacher Teachers PTA 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. Mark Morris, Arts Connection, Noel Pointer, Bank St. College of Education, Long Island University, Community Schools program will also bring in additional programs that will support family and community engagement Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 2018-19 CEP 25   Parent volunteers  Translating programs   ENL Teacher  Professional articles Surveys Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A SIG X PTA Funded In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By January 2018 the Community School Director, Administration, Executive Board and Teachers will meet with school administration and parents to discuss and evaluate the needs of the school community. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. School wide event attendance sheets   Parent Feedback at Community Conversations  Teacher Feedback (on-going)  Survey results Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 26  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) SETSS Small group Pre Power Saturday Oneto one Power Saturday ESLAfterschool SETSS When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) During the school day After school Saturday Small group During the school day Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Mathematics Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) NYSELATest Teacher'sCollege Running Records Otherinformal assessments NYSMath Test Go Math Assessments Other informal assessments Science Informal assessments Social Studies Informal assessments Informal observation At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Pre Power Saturday Oneto one Power Saturday Small group instruction during the day Small group instruction during the day Conversations Small group Small group Small group Saturday During the school day During the school day During the school day Discussions One to one 2018-19 CEP 27  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. NA Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). We currently have 10 students in temporary housing 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 CEP 28   Counseling with Guidance  Tutoring    AIS services  Field Trips and out of state excursions Special busing and MetroCards School Supplies and Emergency supplies as needed 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. Our school has set aside $1,700 aside for these students. 2018-19 CEP 29  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools X Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. N/A 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). N/A Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. NA 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). NA 2018-19 CEP 30  Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). N/A 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. N/A 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Column B Verify with an (X) Section Reference(s) Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A X X X n/a x 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, 2018-19 CEP 31  State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.  2018-19 CEP 32   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 CEP 33  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. P.S.38, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. P.S. 38 will support parents and students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students Providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; informational materials to assist parents understand their child's emotional needs Providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children-fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress 2018-19 CEP 34  Providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments through meetings and literature and sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand Providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community and educational and cultural opportunities for families to improve student achievement Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English New Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with families to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s programs. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Parent Involvement Policy, parents of participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct a minimum of 2-3 parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; 2018-19 CEP 35  ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g.,ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report during parent engagement time, PTC events: as well as community conversations ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events; ● conduct a Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: ● holding an annual Parent Curriculum Conference; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; before school, after school and on the weekends ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports, planners/ folders that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities; Weekly email blasts will be sent out to help keep families informed of upcoming events School-Parent Compact (SPC) Public School 38, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; 2018-19 CEP 36  ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the ESSA Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening. We will make every effort make transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; translation services available as needed ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs translated in appropriate languages to meet the needs of our school wide population ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; introduce in October, review January and revisit in May. Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with ENL families ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in the school and observe by appointment ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; 2018-19 CEP 37  I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents and approved by staff ● ensuring that the Title Ill funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check homework everyday and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (according to grade level) ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● teach my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; 2018-19 CEP 38  ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn., respecting my personal space and space of others, be actively engaged in the learning process 2018-19 CEP 39  Addendum: Community School Partnerships Directions: The Community School (CS) strategy is directly aligned to the Framework for Great Schools. Community Schools bring schools and community partners together and integrate academics, health, youth development, and family engagement to provide students with the tools and opportunities they need to succeed. The Core Services in Community Schools are Expanded Learning Time (ELT), Attendance Supports, Family Engagement, and Health & Wellness. Part 1 – Community School Partnerships Goal(s) How is the CS strategy integrated into academic instruction at your school, and what impact has it had on student academic outcomes? CS strategy will affect academic instruction in the following ways: CS per-session budget employs teachers for targeted academic intervention services including weekly after school test prep and recess camps over selected school holiday breaks. CS partnership with Brooklyn College Community Partnership allows for 100 students to participate in a college campus tour aligned with PS 38's college and career readiness curriculum. CS partner organizations focus on supporting the social and emotional development of youth through counseling services and arts instruction aims to increase student engagement. Indicate the summative goal(s) of the Community School for the 2018-19 school year. Be sure to construct the goal to be SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Realistic, and Time-bound. CS aims to increase diverse parent involvement by 15 % through monthly activities/events that alternate time of day (morning/evening) and offer child care when appropriate. These events will run September through June. Student and parent surveys will determine topics. CS will increase equity work with families/community members through Breaking the Cycles Consulting Services partner. CS will create inclusive opportunities for students K-5 to participate in quality enrichment during the day and after school beginning in late September through and ending in mid-May. All programming will be free of charge, offered on a first come first serve basis employing Schools Staff and Partner Organization staff. Enrolling 65% of K-5 student body. CS will continue equity work with Teaching staff and Administration through Breaking the Cycles Consulting Services partner. Offering PDs every other month October through June. Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Community School Annual Goal(s): How will achieving your Community School Goal(s)--in Expanded Learning Time (ELT), Attendance Supports, Family Engagement, and Health & Wellness--support your academic goals for students? CS goals positively effect our school environment and create a higher probability for student success based on the increased engagement of themselves, their families and their teachers. Part 2 – Community School Partnerships Core Services Action Plan Part 2a. Identify the Community-based Organization (CBO) partnerships that you will develop in ELT, Attendance Supports, Family Engagement, and Health & Wellness, their target student population(s), and scope of the services provided. As well as supporting schools’ supportive environment and attendance work, CBOs should be helping to support your school’s instructional focus. 2018-19 CEP 40  CBO Partnership Counseling in Schools Target Population Scope of Service SY18-19 SMART Goal K-5 Based on self/family, or staff identified need. 1) Individual and group counseling case work. Sept- June Collectively service 250 students for 60 to 90 hours each. 2) Enrolled student crisis management support. LeAP Grades K-5 3) Restorative framework class push in. Visual and performance arts enrichment in the form of: Collectively service 250 students for 60-90 hours each. Breaking the Cycles Consulting Services Family members, school Staff and school Administration. 1) After-school programming. 2) Classroom push in. Culturally responsive pedagogy workshops for families and school staff and admin. Brooklyn College Community Partnership Grades 3-5 Collectively service 250 students for 60-90 hours each. 1) Facilitation of 2 BK College campus 10 student and 2 (Fall and Spring respectively) group case load per intern. Increase students served by 5% Served 100% of grades Sept- May: 4 Staff/Admin workshops 4 Family Workshops June: 1 Combined workshop 1 November tour date 2018-19 CEP 41  tours for a total of 100 students. 1 April tour date 2) On site college and career readiness workshops. Part 3 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 3a. Indicate resources your Community Partnership will leverage to achieve your summative SMART goal(s) and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. CIS Furnishes PS 38 with 2 Full Time Admin employees and three stipend interns. CS supplies 3 LeAP Teaching Artists CS supplies Principal with discretionary per-session funding. Part 3b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) Title I SWP Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside X 21st Century SIG Grant School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 3c. Describe how the school will partner with the Lead CBO to do the following: 1. Community Schools are expected to partner with a community-based partner organization (CBO) and together with members of the School Leadership Team, hire a Community School Director. The Director will lead implementation of the asset and needs assessment process, and other critically important coordinating activities. Indicate how you will leverage this aspect of the work. Community Schools are expected to personalize the needs of all students, through strategic programming and services, as determined by the asset and needs assessment, and must also offer Expanded Learning Time (ELT) and mental health programming. In completing this section, ensure that you think about how: (1) the right services are provided to the right students and families at the right time; and (2) how you will seamlessly coordinate services with instructional programming happening throughout and outside of the school day. Indicate how you will implement this work, and describe other programming you anticipate to be in place to strengthen this initiative. Community Schools are expected to emerge as Partnership Schools, which are places where parents and families feel welcome, actively participate in the conversation and decision-making around the renewal of their schools, and have many opportunities to advocate for their children. Monthly meetings and Community School Forums engaging families and community stakeholders will be a critical part of this family engagement strategy. Describe how you will implement this aspect of the work. Community School Principals are expected to meet on a weekly basis with their Community School Director, select Assistant Principals, key staff, and other CBOs, to analyze trends in data and case manage individual students. Data tools – including the New Visions Data Sorter - and training will be available for schools to use. Indicate how you will implement this aspect of the work. 2. 3. 4. 2018-19 CEP 42  CIS Community School Director will work with School Admin and Parent Coordinator to develop a CS team composed of family and community members, with School Staff, SLT and/or PTA member representation; in order to collectively act upon information gathered from asset and needs assessments, as well as to plan monthly events for school body and families, related to established goals. Team will meet monthly. CIS Social Work Supervisor will work with school admin and partner with teachers and family members to determine which students need individual services. CIS Masters Level Social Work interns will engage in individual and group casework. Inter caseloads of 10-15 and group work target of running 2 fall and 2 spring groups. CIS data specialist will utilize 21CCLC Youthservices database to document and monitor CS programming attendance. CSD and SW Supervisor will participate in school run attendance meetings. Heat map will be used to identify chronically absent students and at risk students who will then be assign to receive success mentorship, academic intervention or counseling services. Workshop of chronic absenteeism for parents can be held. Strategies such as acknowledgement and incentivizing attendance progress- small or large can be implemented. Part 4 – Community School Partnerships Oversight Part 4a. Key Staff and Partners 1. Name and describe the scope of involvement of all community partners working in the school (include partners supporting ELT, counseling, enrichment, etc.) 2. Name the members of your Community School Team and how meetings will be organized and structured to engage all stakeholders and be focused on results. 3. Explain data strategies including the use of the data sorter, and steps that the school will take to ensure that the appropriate interventions are provided to the right students Counseling in Schools: *Community School Director: Atiyya Abdur-Rahman Full time CS Administrator- Adhere to 21st Century Community Schools Grant requirements, which include established target enrollment (250 students) and hour participation numbers (60-90 hours). Act as liaison between school and CS partner organizations as well as coordinate program offerings. Promote equity driven family connection. Determine need for and organize SC school wide initiatives. *SIFI "Seminar in Field Instruction" Supervisor: Rahcna Chandiramani Full time Social Work Masters Level intern supervisor. Support interns in daily practice and report back to their respective schools. Support the families of enrolled students with crisis management and counseling needs. Take on small case (5 students/families) load if necessary. LeAP Free arts programming for 40 percent of PS 38 K-5 students. Furnish PS 38 with 3 Teaching Artist to: a) facilitate in school enrichment, b) to provide after school programming. 2018-19 CEP 43  Breaking the Cycles Consulting Services Facilitators: Lurie and Brian Favors Promot culturally responsive teaching and learning through 4 teacher/admin; 4 family and 1 joint admin/ teacher/family workshop through out the school year. Cobble Hill High Possible reading mentorship programming. TBD Brooklyn College Community Partnership Serphaine Stimpson Faciliate College Campus tour for 100 students grades 3-5. 2) Comm Schools Team Atiyya Abdur-Rahman, Jacqueline Smith, Hassan Abdus-Salam, SLT Member, Gen/ SPED/ GT Parent, Teacher, Community Member. 3) Data Strategies CIS data specialist will utilize 21CCLC Youthservices database to document and monitor CS programming attendance. CSD and SW Supervisor will participate in school run attendance meetings. Heat map will be used to identify chronically absent students and at risk students who will then be assign to receive success mentorship, academic intervention or counseling services. Workshop of chronic absenteeism for parents can be held. Strategies such as acknowledgement and incentivizing attendance progress- small or large can be implemented. Part 4b. Indicate resources needed including human resources, instructional resources, and schedule adjustments to implement the Community School program. 1) Administrative space that is: a) Also sufficient for student privacy during one to one counseling or family sessions. b) Accessible by lock and key (FERPA, HIPPA laws) 2018-19 CEP 44  2) Access to ATS school roster printout, updated as necessary. 3) Building permits for After school and Saturday programming. 4) Periodic access to teachers for partner run PD sessions. Part 4c. Timeline for implementation and completion, including start and end dates. The above list is already in action but will need to be secured for the 2018-2019 school year. Part 4d. Mental Health Work Plan Separate from this S/CEP, schools will complete a Mental Health Work Plan that will become an addendum to this document. 2018-19 CEP 45  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 2018-19 CEP 46  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: Analysis of 2018 NYSESLAT test scores show that among 34 ELLs, 8 students scored Commanding, 10 students scored Expanding, 7 students scored Transitioning, 5 students scored Emerging and 2 student scored Entering. This year among 34 students, 8 students have tested out, 5 students have made progress, 8 students remain at the same level and 2 students have shifted down one level. The scores for each modality reveal that some of our students are still struggling in the areas of Reading and Writing. Therefore, the rationale for our After School program is to give our ELLs extra support necessary to progress on the NYSESLAT and State Exams in reading and writing. Our After School program will be open to our 43 ELLs comprised of grades K, 1st, 2nd, 3rd, 4th and 5th grades in general and special education. The students will be divided into two subgroups: K-2 and 3-5. This would put about 17 students in each group, and there will be a 17:1 student/teacher ratio. The program will run from December 12 2018 - March 27, 2019. It will be on Wednesdays and Thursdays from 2:20-4:20. The Language Translation and Interpretation Unit will be utilized to ensure all communications with parents are in their preferred HL. A Title III binder will be created and will include: attendance, running records for participants, test scores, student work samples, parent outreach, PD agendas and lesson plans. A certified ENL teacher will co-teach with a Common Branch/ENL certified teacher. One supervisor will be on duty since this will be an after school program. All instruction will be provided in English. Since the students are not literate in their home language, all reading and writing instruction will focus on English. If students do need support in with their home language, bilingual dictionaries and Ipads are available for translations. Students will also use Fountas and Pinnell's Leveled Literacy Intervention program. All materials purchased with Title III funds will be used exclusively during the Title III program. Supplemental materials used exclusively during the Title III program will include, but are not limited to: Raz Kids and BrainPop We will also use visual and auditory aides. There will be small group instruction that will include scaffolding and the use of graphic organizers and charts. Both teachers will provide direct instruction to support the students in writing and reading that include but are not limited to: phonemic awareness, decoding, increase sight word lexicon, comprehension and writing small moments and paragraphs. Strategies learned through Orton and Gillingham will be incorporated into these small group sessions to reach the needs of our struggling readers. <!--{cke_protected}{C}%3C!%2D%2D%5Bif%20gte%20mso%209%5D%3E%3Cxml%3E%0A%20%3Co%3AOfficeDocumentSettings%3E%0A%20%20%3Co%3AAllowPNG%3E%3C%2Fo%3AAllowPNG%3E%0A%20%3C%2Fo%3AOfficeDocumentSettings%3E%0A%3C%2Fxml%3E%3C!%5Bendif%5D%2D%2D%3E--><!--{cke_protected}{C}%3C!%2D%2D%5Bif%20gte%20mso%209%5D%3E%3Cxml%3E%0A%20%3Cw%3AWordDocument%3E%0A%20%20%3Cw%3AView%3ENormal%3C%2Fw%3AView%3E%0A%20%20%3Cw%3AZoom%3E0%3C%2Fw%3AZoom%3E%0A%20%20%3Cw%3ATrackMoves%3E%3C%2Fw%3ATrackMoves%3E%0A%20%20%3Cw%3ATrackFormatting%3E%3C%2Fw%3ATrackFormatting%3E%0A%20%20%3Cw%3APunctuationKerning%3E%3C%2Fw%3APunctuationKerning%3E%0A%20%20%3Cw%3AValidateAgainstSchemas%3E%3C%2Fw%3AValidateAgainstSchemas%3E%0A%20%20%3Cw%3ASaveIfXMLInvalid%3Efalse%3C%2Fw%3ASaveIfXMLInvalid%3E%0A%20%20%3Cw%3AIgnoreMixedContent%3Efalse%3C%2Fw%3AIgnoreMixedContent%3E%0A%20%20%3Cw%3AAlwaysShowPlacehold2018-19 CEP 47  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information erText%3Efalse%3C%2Fw%3AAlwaysShowPlaceholderText%3E%0A%20%20%3Cw%3ADoNotPromoteQF%3E%3C%2Fw%3ADoNotPromoteQF%3E%0A%20%20%3Cw%3ALidThemeOther%3EEN-US%3C%2Fw%3ALidThemeOther%3E%0A%20%20%3Cw%3ALidThemeAsian%3EX-NONE%3C%2Fw%3ALidThemeAsian%3E%0A%20%20%3Cw%3ALidThemeComplexScript%3EX-NONE%3C%2Fw%3ALidThemeComplexScript%3E%0A%20%20%3Cw%3ACompatibility%3E%0A%20%20%20%3Cw%3ABreakWrappedTables%3E%3C%2Fw%3ABreakWrappedTables%3E%0A%20%20%20%3Cw%3ASnapToGridInCell%3E%3C%2Fw%3ASnapToGridInCell%3E%0A%20%20%20%3Cw%3AWrapTextWithPunct%3E%3C%2Fw%3AWrapTextWithPunct%3E%0A%20%20%20%3Cw%3AUseAsianBreakRules%3E%3C%2Fw%3AUseAsianBreakRules%3E%0A%20%20%20%3Cw%3ADontGrowAutofit%3E%3C%2Fw%3ADontGrowAutofit%3E%0A%20%20%20%3Cw%3ASplitPgBreakAndParaMark%3E%3C%2Fw%3ASplitPgBreakAndParaMark%3E%0A%20%20%20%3Cw%3AEnableOpenTypeKerning%3E%3C%2Fw%3AEnableOpenTypeKerning%3E%0A%20%20%20%3Cw%3ADontFlipMirrorIndents%3E%3C%2Fw%3ADontFlipMirrorIndents%3E%0A%20%20%20%3Cw%3AOverrideTableStyleHps%3E%3C%2Fw%3AOverrideTableStyleHps%3E%0A%20%20%3C%2Fw%3ACompatibility%3E%0A%20%20%3Cm%3AmathPr%3E%0A%20%20%20%3Cm%3AmathFont%20m%3Aval%3D%22Cambria%20Math%22%3E%3C%2Fm%3AmathFont%3E%0A%20%20%20%3Cm%3AbrkBin%20m%3Aval%3D%22before%22%3E%3C%2Fm%3AbrkBin%3E%0A%20%20%20%3Cm%3AbrkBinSub%20m%3Aval%3D%22%26%2345%3B-%22%3E%3C%2Fm%3AbrkBinSub%3E%0A%20%20%20%3Cm%3AsmallFrac%20m%3Aval%3D%22off%22%3E%3C%2Fm%3AsmallFrac%3E%0A%20%20%20%3Cm%3AdispDef%3E%3C%2Fm%3AdispDef%3E%0A%20%20%20%3Cm%3AlMargin%20m%3Aval%3D%220%22%3E%3C%2Fm%3AlMargin%3E%0A%20%20%20%3Cm%3ArMargin%20m%3Aval%3D%220%22%3E%3C%2Fm%3ArMargin%3E%0A%20%20%20%3Cm%3AdefJc%20m%3Aval%3D%22centerGroup%22%3E%3C%2Fm%3AdefJc%3E%0A%20%20%20%3Cm%3AwrapIndent%20m%3Aval%3D%221440%22%3E%3C%2Fm%3AwrapIndent%3E%0A%20%20%20%3Cm%3AintLim%20m%3Aval%3D%22subSup%22%3E%3C%2Fm%3AintLim%3E%0A%20%20%20%3Cm%3AnaryLim%20m%3Aval%3D%22undOvr%22%3E%3C%2Fm%3AnaryLim%3E%0A%20%20%3C%2Fm%3AmathPr%3E%3C%2Fw%3AWordDocument%3E%0A%3C%2Fxml%3E%3C!%5Bendif%5D%2D%2D%3E--><!--{cke_protected}{C}%3C!%2D%2D%5Bif%20gte%20mso%209%5D%3E%3Cxml%3E%0A%20%3Cw%3ALatentStyles%20DefLockedState%3D%22false%22%20DefUnhideWhenUsed%3D%22true%22%0A%20%20DefSemiHidden%3D%22true%22%20DefQFormat%3D%22false%22%20DefPriority%3D%2299%22%0A%20%20LatentStyleCount%3D%22267%22%3E%0A%20%20%3Cw%3ALsdException%20Locked%3D%22false%22%20Priority%3D%220%22%20SemiHidden%3D%22false%22%0A%20%20%20UnhideWhenUsed%3D%22false%22%20QFormat%3D%22true%22%20Name%3D%22Normal%22%3E%3C%2Fw%3ALsdException%3E%0A%20%20%3Cw%3ALsdException%20Locked%3D%22false%22%20Priority%3D%229%22%20SemiHidden%3D%22false%22%0A%20%20%20UnhideWhenUsed%3D%22false%22%20QFormat%3D%22true%22%20Name%3D%22heading%201%22%3E%3C%2Fw%3ALsdException%3E%0A%20%20%3Cw%3ALsdException%20Locked%3D%22false%22%20Priority%3D%229%22%20QFormat%3D%22true%22%20Name%3D%22heading%202%22%3E%3C%2Fw%3ALsdException%3E%0A%20%20%3Cw%3ALsdException%20Locked%3D%22false%22%20Priority%3D%229%22%20QFormat%3D%22true%22%20Name%3D%22heading%203%22%3E%3C%2Fw%3ALsdException%3E%0A%20%20%3Cw%3ALsdException%20Locked%3D%22false%22%20Priority%3D%229%22%20QFormat%3D%22true%22%20Name%3D%22heading%204%22%3E%3C%2Fw%3ALsdException%3E%0A%20%20%3Cw%3ALsdException%20Locked%3D%22false%22%20Priority%3D%229%22%20QFormat%3D%22true%22%20Name%3D%22heading%205%22%3E%3C%2Fw%3ALsdException%3E%0A%20%20%3Cw%3ALsdException%20Locked%3D%22false%22%20Priority%3D%229%22%20QFormat%3D%22true%22%20Name%3D%22heading%206%22%3E%3C%2Fw%3ALsdException%3E%0A%20%20%3Cw%3ALsdException%20Locked%3D%22false%22%20Priority%3D%229%22%20QFormat%3D%22true%22%20Name%3D%22heading%207%22%3E%3C%2Fw%3ALsdException%3E%0A%20%20%3Cw%3ALsdException%20Locked%3D%22false%22%20Priority%3D%229%22%20QFormat%3D%22true%22%20Name%3D%22heading%208%22%3E%3C%2Fw%3ALsdException%3E%0A%20%20%3Cw%3ALsdException%20Locked%3D%22false%22%20Priority%3D%229%22%20QFormat%3D%22true%22%20Name%3D%22heading%209%22%3E2018-19 CEP 48  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information %3C%2Fw%3ALsdException%3E%0A%20%20%3Cw%3ALsdException%20Locked%3D%22false%22%20Priority%3D%2239%22%20Name%3D%22toc%201%22%3E%3C%2Fw%3ALsdException%3E%0A%20%20%3Cw%3ALsdException%20Locked%3D%22false%22%20Priority%3D%2239%22%20Name%3D%22toc%202%22%3E%3C%2Fw%3ALsdException%3E%0A%20%20%3Cw%3ALsdException%20Locked%3D%22false%22%20Priority%3D%2239%22%20Name%3D%22toc%203%22%3E%3C%2Fw%3ALsdException%3E%0A%20%20%3Cw%3ALsdException%20Locked%3D%22false%22%20Priority%3D%2239%22%20Name%3D%22toc%204%22%3E%3C%2Fw%3ALsdException%3E%0A%20%20%3Cw%3ALsdException%20Locked%3D%22false%22%20Priority%3D%2239%22%20Name%3D%22toc%205%22%3E%3C%2Fw%3ALsdException%3E%0A%20%20%3Cw%3ALsdException%20Locked%3D%22false%22%20Priority%3D%2239%22%20Name%3D%22toc%206%22%3E%3C%2Fw%3ALsdException%3E%0A%20%20%3Cw%3ALsdException%20Locked%3D%22false%22%20Priority%3D%2239%22%20Name%3D%22toc%207%22%3E%3C%2Fw%3ALsdException%3E%0A%20%20%3Cw%3ALsdException%20Locked%3D%22false%22%20Priority%3D%2239%22%20Name%3D%22toc%208%22%3E%3C%2Fw%3ALsdException%3E%0A%20%20%3Cw%3ALsdException%20Locked%3D%22false%22%20Priority%3D%2239%22%20Name%3D%22toc%209%22%3E%3C%2Fw%3ALsdException%3E%0A%20%20%3Cw%3ALsdException%20Locked%3D%22false%22%20Priority%3D%2235%22%20QFormat%3D%22true%22%20Name%3D%22caption%22%3E%3C%2Fw%3ALsdException%3E%0A%20%20%3Cw%3ALsdException%20Locked%3D%22false%22%20Priority%3D%2210%22%20SemiHidden%3D%22false%22%0A%20%20%20UnhideWhenUsed%3D%22false%22%20QFormat%3D%22true%22%20Name%3D%22Title%22%3E%3C%2Fw%3ALsdException%3E%0A%20%20%3Cw%3ALsdException%20Locked%3D%22false%22%20Priority%3D%221%22%20Name%3D%22Default%20Paragraph%20Font%22%3E%3C%2Fw%3ALsdException%3E%0A%20%20%3Cw%3ALsdException%20Locked%3D%22false%22%20Priority%3D%2211%22%20SemiHidden%3D%22false%22%0A%20%20%20UnhideWhenUsed%3D%22false%22%20QFormat%3D%22true%22%20Name%3D%22Subtitle%22%3E%3C%2Fw%3ALsdException%3E%0A%20%20%3Cw%3ALsdException%20Locked%3D%22false%22%20Priority%3D%2222%22%20SemiHidden%3D%22false%22%0A%20%20%20UnhideWhenUsed%3D%22false%22%20QFormat%3D%22true%22%20Name%3D%22Strong%22%3E%3C%2Fw%3ALsdException%3E%0A%20%20%3Cw%3ALsdException%20Locked%3D%22false%22%20Priority%3D%2220%22%20SemiHidden%3D%22false%22%0A%20%20%20UnhideWhenUsed%3D%22false%22%20QFormat%3D%22true%22%20Name%3D%22Emphasis%22%3E%3C%2Fw%3ALsdException%3E%0A%20%20%3Cw%3ALsdException%20Locked%3D%22false%22%20Priority%3D%2259%22%20SemiHidden%3D%22false%22%0A%20%20%20UnhideWhenUsed%3D%22false%22%20Name%3D%22Table%20Grid%22%3E%3C%2Fw%3ALsdException%3E%0A%20%20%3Cw%3ALsdException%20Locked%3D%22false%22%20UnhideWhenUsed%3D%22false%22%20Name%3D%22Placeholder%20Text%22%3E%3C%2Fw%3ALsdException%3E%0A%20%20%3Cw%3ALsdException%20Locked%3D%22false%22%20Priority%3D%221%22%20SemiHidden%3D%22false%22%0A%20%20%20UnhideWhenUsed%3D%22false%22%20QFormat%3D%22true%22%20Name%3D%22No%20Spacing%22%3E%3C%2Fw%3ALsdException%3E%0A%20%20%3Cw%3ALsdException%20Locked%3D%22false%22%20Priority%3D%2260%22%20SemiHidden%3D%22false%22%0A%20%20%20UnhideWhenUsed%3D%22false%22%20Name%3D%22Light%20Shading%22%3E%3C%2Fw%3ALsdException%3E%0A%20%20%3Cw%3ALsdException%20Locked%3D%22false%22%20Priority%3D%2261%22%20SemiHidden%3D%22false%22%0A%20%20%20UnhideWhenUsed%3D%22false%22%20Name%3D%22Light%20List%22%3E%3C%2Fw%3ALsdException%3E%0A%20%20%3Cw%3ALsdException%20Locked%3D%22false%22%20Priority%3D%2262%22%20SemiHidden%3D%22false%22%0A%20%20%20UnhideWhenUsed%3D%22false%22%20Name%3D%22Light%20Grid%22%3E%3C%2Fw%3ALsdException%3E%0A%20%20%3Cw%3ALsdException%20Locked%3D%22false%22%20Priority%3D%2263%22%20SemiHidden%3D%22false%22%0A%20%20%20UnhideWhenUsed%3D%22false%22%20Name%3D%22Medium%20Shading%201%22%3E%3C%2Fw%3ALsdException%3E%0A%20%20%3Cw%3ALsdException%20Locked%3D%22false%22%20Priority%3D%2264%22%20SemiHidden%3D%22false%22%0A%20%20%20UnhideWhenUsed%3D%22false%22%20Name%3D%22Medium%20Shading%202%22%3E%3C%2Fw%3ALsdException%3E%0A%20%20%3Cw%3ALsdException%20Locked%3D%22false%22%20Priority%3D%2265%22%20SemiHidden%3D%22false%22%0A%20%20%20UnhideWhenUsed%3D%22false%22%20Name%3D%22Medium%20Lis2018-19 CEP 49  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information t%201%22%3E%3C%2Fw%3ALsdException%3E%0A%20%20%3Cw%3ALsdException%20Locked%3D%22false%22%20Priority%3D%2266%22%20SemiHidden%3D%22false%22%0A%20%20%20UnhideWhenUsed%3D%22false%22%20Name%3D%22Medium%20List%202%22%3E%3C%2Fw%3ALsdException%3E%0A%20%20%3Cw%3ALsdException%20Locked%3D%22false%22%20Priority%3D%2267%22%20SemiHidden%3D%22false%22%0A%20%20%20UnhideWhenUsed%3D%22false%22%20Name%3D%22Medium%20Grid%201%22%3E%3C%2Fw%3ALsdException%3E%0A%20%20%3Cw%3ALsdException%20Locked%3D%22false%22%20Priority%3D%2268%22%20SemiHidden%3D%22false%22%0A%20%20%20UnhideWhenUsed%3D%22false%22%20Name%3D%22Medium%20Grid%202%22%3E%3C%2Fw%3ALsdException%3E%0A%20%20%3Cw%3ALsdException%20Locked%3D%22false%22%20Priority%3D%2269%22%20SemiHidden%3D%22false%22%0A%20%20%20UnhideWhenUsed%3D%22false%22%20Name%3D%22Medium%20Grid%203%22%3E%3C%2Fw%3ALsdException%3E%0A%20%20%3Cw%3ALsdException%20Locked%3D%22false%22%20Priority%3D%2270%22%20SemiHidden%3D%22false%22%0A%20%20%20UnhideWhenUsed%3D%22false%22%20Name%3D%22Dark%20List%22%3E%3C%2Fw%3ALsdException%3E%0A%20%20%3Cw%3ALsdException%20Locked%3D%22false%22%20Priority%3D%2271%22%20SemiHidden%3D%22false%22%0A%20%20%20UnhideWhenUsed%3D%22false%22%20Name%3D%22Colorful%20Shading%22%3E%3C%2Fw%3ALsdException%3E%0A%20%20%3Cw%3ALsdException%20Locked%3D%22false%22%20Priority%3D%2272%22%20SemiHidden%3D%22false%22%0A%20%20%20UnhideWhenUsed%3D%22false%22%20Name%3D%22Colorful%20List%22%3E%3C%2Fw%3ALsdException%3E%0A%20%20%3Cw%3ALsdException%20Locked%3D%22false%22%20Priority%3D%2273%22%20SemiHidden%3D%22false%22%0A%20%20%20UnhideWhenUsed%3D%22false%22%20Name%3D%22Colorful%20Grid%22%3E%3C%2Fw%3ALsdException%3E%0A%20%20%3Cw%3ALsdException%20Locked%3D%22false%22%20Priority%3D%2260%22%20SemiHidden%3D%22false%22%0A%20%20%20UnhideWhenUsed%3D%22false%22%20Name%3D%22Light%20Shading%20Accent%201%22%3E%3C%2Fw%3ALsdException%3E%0A%20%20%3Cw%3ALsdException%20Locked%3D%22false%22%20Priority%3D%2261%22%20SemiHidden%3D%22false%22%0A%20%20%20UnhideWhenUsed%3D%22false%22%20Name%3D%22Light%20List%20Accent%201%22%3E%3C%2Fw%3ALsdException%3E%0A%20%20%3Cw%3ALsdException%20Locked%3D%22false%22%20Priority%3D%2262%22%20SemiHidden%3D%22false%22%0A%20%20%20UnhideWhenUsed%3D%22false%22%20Name%3D%22Light%20Grid%20Accent%201%22%3E%3C%2Fw%3ALsdException%3E%0A%20%20%3Cw%3ALsdException%20Locked%3D%22false%22%20Priority%3D%2263%22%20SemiHidden%3D%22false%22%0A%20%20%20UnhideWhenUsed%3D%22false%22%20Name%3D%22Medium%20Shading%201%20Accent%201%22%3E%3C%2Fw%3ALsdException%3E%0A%20%20%3Cw%3ALsdException%20Locked%3D%22false%22%20Priority%3D%2264%22%20SemiHidden%3D%22false%22%0A%20%20%20UnhideWhenUsed%3D%22false%22%20Name%3D%22Medium%20Shading%202%20Accent%201%22%3E%3C%2Fw%3ALsdException%3E%0A%20%20%3Cw%3ALsdException%20Locked%3D%22false%22%20Priority%3D%2265%22%20SemiHidden%3D%22false%22%0A%20%20%20UnhideWhenUsed%3D%22false%22%20Name%3D%22Medium%20List%201%20Accent%201%22%3E%3C%2Fw%3ALsdException%3E%0A%20%20%3Cw%3ALsdException%20Locked%3D%22false%22%20UnhideWhenUsed%3D%22false%22%20Name%3D%22Revision%22%3E%3C%2Fw%3ALsdException%3E%0A%20%20%3Cw%3ALsdException%20Locked%3D%22false%22%20Priority%3D%2234%22%20SemiHidden%3D%22false%22%0A%20%20%20UnhideWhenUsed%3D%22false%22%20QFormat%3D%22true%22%20Name%3D%22List%20Paragraph%22%3E%3C%2Fw%3ALsdException%3E%0A%20%20%3Cw%3ALsdException%20Locked%3D%22false%22%20Priority%3D%2229%22%20SemiHidden%3D%22false%22%0A%20%20%20UnhideWhenUsed%3D%22false%22%20QFormat%3D%22true%22%20Name%3D%22Quote%22%3E%3C%2Fw%3ALsdException%3E%0A%20%20%3Cw%3ALsdException%20Locked%3D%22false%22%20Priority%3D%2230%22%20SemiHidden%3D%22false%22%0A%20%20%20UnhideWhenUsed%3D%22false%22%20QFormat%3D%22true%22%20Name%3D%22Intense%20Quote%22%3E%3C%2Fw%3ALsdException%3E%0A%20%20%3Cw%3ALsdException%20Locked%3D%22false%22%20Priority%3D%2266%22%20SemiHidden%3D%22false%22%0A%20%20%20UnhideWhenUsed%3D%22false%22%20Name%3D%22Medium%20List%202%20Accent%201%22%3E%3C%2Fw%3ALsdException%3E%0A%20%20%3Cw%3ALsdException%20Locked%3D%22false%22%20Priority%3D%2267%22%20SemiHidden%3D%22fa2018-19 CEP 50  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information lse%22%0A%20%20%20UnhideWhenUsed%3D%22false%22%20Name%3D%22Medium%20Grid%201%20Accent%201%22%3E%3C%2Fw%3ALsdException%3E%0A%20%20%3Cw%3ALsdException%20Locked%3D%22false%22%20Priority%3D%2268%22%20SemiHidden%3D%22false%22%0A%20%20%20UnhideWhenUsed%3D%22false%22%20Name%3D%22Medium%20Grid%202%20Accent%201%22%3E%3C%2Fw%3ALsdException%3E%0A%20%20%3Cw%3ALsdException%20Locked%3D%22false%22%20Priority%3D%2269%22%20SemiHidden%3D%22false%22%0A%20%20%20UnhideWhenUsed%3D%22false%22%20Name%3D%22Medium%20Grid%203%20Accent%201%22%3E%3C%2Fw%3ALsdException%3E%0A%20%20%3Cw%3ALsdException%20Locked%3D%22false%22%20Priority%3D%2270%22%20SemiHidden%3D%22false%22%0A%20%20%20UnhideWhenUsed%3D%22false%22%20Name%3D%22Dark%20List%20Accent%201%22%3E%3C%2Fw%3ALsdException%3E%0A%20%20%3Cw%3ALsdException%20Locked%3D%22false%22%20Priority%3D%2271%22%20SemiHidden%3D%22false%22%0A%20%20%20UnhideWhenUsed%3D%22false%22%20Name%3D%22Colorful%20Shading%20Accent%201%22%3E%3C%2Fw%3ALsdException%3E%0A%20%20%3Cw%3ALsdException%20Locked%3D%22false%22%20Priority%3D%2272%22%20SemiHidden%3D%22false%22%0A%20%20%20UnhideWhenUsed%3D%22false%22%20Name%3D%22Colorful%20List%20Accent%201%22%3E%3C%2Fw%3ALsdException%3E%0A%20%20%3Cw%3ALsdException%20Locked%3D%22false%22%20Priority%3D%2273%22%20SemiHidden%3D%22false%22%0A%20%20%20UnhideWhenUsed%3D%22false%22%20Name%3D%22Colorful%20Grid%20Accent%201%22%3E%3C%2Fw%3ALsdException%3E%0A%20%20%3Cw%3ALsdException%20Locked%3D%22false%22%20Priority%3D%2260%22%20SemiHidden%3D%22false%22%0A%20%20%20UnhideWhenUsed%3D%22false%22%20Name%3D%22Light%20Shading%20Accent%202%22%3E%3C%2Fw%3ALsdException%3E%0A%20%20%3Cw%3ALsdException%20Locked%3D%22false%22%20Priority%3D%2261%22%20SemiHidden%3D%22false%22%0A%20%20%20UnhideWhenUsed%3D%22false%22%20Name%3D%22Light%20List%20Accent%202%22%3E%3C%2Fw%3ALsdException%3E%0A%20%20%3Cw%3ALsdException%20Locked%3D%22false%22%20Priority%3D%2262%22%20SemiHidden%3D%22false%22%0A%20%20%20UnhideWhenUsed%3D%22false%22%20Name%3D%22Light%20Grid%20Accent%202%22%3E%3C%2Fw%3ALsdException%3E%0A%20%20%3Cw%3ALsdException%20Locked%3D%22false%22%20Priority%3D%2263%22%20SemiHidden%3D%22false%22%0A%20%20%20UnhideWhenUsed%3D%22false%22%20Name%3D%22Medium%20Shading%201%20Accent%202%22%3E%3C%2Fw%3ALsdException%3E%0A%20%20%3Cw%3ALsdException%20Locked%3D%22false%22%20Priority%3D%2264%22%20SemiHidden%3D%22false%22%0A%20%20%20UnhideWhenUsed%3D%22false%22%20Name%3D%22Medium%20Shading%202%20Accent%202%22%3E%3C%2Fw%3ALsdException%3E%0A%20%20%3Cw%3ALsdException%20Locked%3D%22false%22%20Priority%3D%2265%22%20SemiHidden%3D%22false%22%0A%20%20%20UnhideWhenUsed%3D%22false%22%20Name%3D%22Medium%20List%201%20Accent%202%22%3E%3C%2Fw%3ALsdException%3E%0A%20%20%3Cw%3ALsdException%20Locked%3D%22false%22%20Priority%3D%2266%22%20SemiHidden%3D%22false%22%0A%20%20%20UnhideWhenUsed%3D%22false%22%20Name%3D%22Medium%20List%202%20Accent%202%22%3E%3C%2Fw%3ALsdException%3E%0A%20%20%3Cw%3ALsdException%20Locked%3D%22false%22%20Priority%3D%2267%22%20SemiHidden%3D%22false%22%0A%20%20%20UnhideWhenUsed%3D%22false%22%20Name%3D%22Medium%20Grid%201%20Accent%202%22%3E%3C%2Fw%3ALsdException%3E%0A%20%20%3Cw%3ALsdException%20Locked%3D%22false%22%20Priority%3D%2268%22%20SemiHidden%3D%22false%22%0A%20%20%20UnhideWhenUsed%3D%22false%22%20Name%3D%22Medium%20Grid%202%20Accent%202%22%3E%3C%2Fw%3ALsdException%3E%0A%20%20%3Cw%3ALsdException%20Locked%3D%22false%22%20Priority%3D%2269%22%20SemiHidden%3D%22false%22%0A%20%20%20UnhideWhenUsed%3D%22false%22%20Name%3D%22Medium%20Grid%203%20Accent%202%22%3E%3C%2Fw%3ALsdException%3E%0A%20%20%3Cw%3ALsdException%20Locked%3D%22false%22%20Priority%3D%2270%22%20SemiHidden%3D%22false%22%0A%20%20%20UnhideWhenUsed%3D%22false%22%20Name%3D%22Dark%20List%20Accent%202%22%3E%3C%2Fw%3ALsdException%3E%0A%20%20%3Cw%3ALsdException%20Locked%3D%22false%22%20Priority%3D%2271%22%20SemiHidden%3D%22false%22%0A%20%20%20UnhideWhenUsed%3D%22false%22%20Name%3D%22Colorful%20Shading%20Accent%202%22%3E%3C%2Fw%3ALsdException%3E%0A%20%20%3Cw%3ALsdException%20Locked%3D%22false%22%20Priority2018-19 CEP 51  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information %3D%2272%22%20SemiHidden%3D%22false%22%0A%20%20%20UnhideWhenUsed%3D%22false%22%20Name%3D%22Colorful%20List%20Accent%202%22%3E%3C%2Fw%3ALsdException%3E%0A%20%20%3Cw%3ALsdException%20Locked%3D%22false%22%20Priority%3D%2273%22%20SemiHidden%3D%22false%22%0A%20%20%20UnhideWhenUsed%3D%22false%22%20Name%3D%22Colorful%20Grid%20Accent%202%22%3E%3C%2Fw%3ALsdException%3E%0A%20%20%3Cw%3ALsdException%20Locked%3D%22false%22%20Priority%3D%2260%22%20SemiHidden%3D%22false%22%0A%20%20%20UnhideWhenUsed%3D%22false%22%20Name%3D%22Light%20Shading%20Accent%203%22%3E%3C%2Fw%3ALsdException%3E%0A%20%20%3Cw%3ALsdException%20Locked%3D%22false%22%20Priority%3D%2261%22%20SemiHidden%3D%22false%22%0A%20%20%20UnhideWhenUsed%3D%22false%22%20Name%3D%22Light%20List%20Accent%203%22%3E%3C%2Fw%3ALsdException%3E%0A%20%20%3Cw%3ALsdException%20Locked%3D%22false%22%20Priority%3D%2262%22%20SemiHidden%3D%22false%22%0A%20%20%20UnhideWhenUsed%3D%22false%22%20Name%3D%22Light%20Grid%20Accent%203%22%3E%3C%2Fw%3ALsdException%3E%0A%20%20%3Cw%3ALsdException%20Locked%3D%22false%22%20Priority%3D%2263%22%20SemiHidden%3D%22false%22%0A%20%20%20UnhideWhenUsed%3D%22false%22%20Name%3D%22Medium%20Shading%201%20Accent%203%22%3E%3C%2Fw%3ALsdException%3E%0A%20%20%3Cw%3ALsdException%20Locked%3D%22false%22%20Priority%3D%2264%22%20SemiHidden%3D%22false%22%0A%20%20%20UnhideWhenUsed%3D%22false%22%20Name%3D%22Medium%20Shading%202%20Accent%203%22%3E%3C%2Fw%3ALsdException%3E%0A%20%20%3Cw%3ALsdException%20Locked%3D%22false%22%20Priority%3D%2265%22%20SemiHidden%3D%22false%22%0A%20%20%20UnhideWhenUsed%3D%22false%22%20Name%3D%22Medium%20List%201%20Accent%203%22%3E%3C%2Fw%3ALsdException%3E%0A%20%20%3Cw%3ALsdException%20Locked%3D%22false%22%20Priority%3D%2266%22%20SemiHidden%3D%22false%22%0A%20%20%20UnhideWhenUsed%3D%22false%22%20Name%3D%22Medium%20List%202%20Accent%203%22%3E%3C%2Fw%3ALsdException%3E%0A%20%20%3Cw%3ALsdException%20Locked%3D%22false%22%20Priority%3D%2267%22%20SemiHidden%3D%22false%22%0A%20%20%20UnhideWhenUsed%3D%22false%22%20Name%3D%22Medium%20Grid%201%20Accent%203%22%3E%3C%2Fw%3ALsdException%3E%0A%20%20%3Cw%3ALsdException%20Locked%3D%22false%22%20Priority%3D%2268%22%20SemiHidden%3D%22false%22%0A%20%20%20UnhideWhenUsed%3D%22false%22%20Name%3D%22Medium%20Grid%202%20Accent%203%22%3E%3C%2Fw%3ALsdException%3E%0A%20%20%3Cw%3ALsdException%20Locked%3D%22false%22%20Priority%3D%2269%22%20SemiHidden%3D%22false%22%0A%20%20%20UnhideWhenUsed%3D%22false%22%20Name%3D%22Medium%20Grid%203%20Accent%203%22%3E%3C%2Fw%3ALsdException%3E%0A%20%20%3Cw%3ALsdException%20Locked%3D%22false%22%20Priority%3D%2270%22%20SemiHidden%3D%22false%22%0A%20%20%20UnhideWhenUsed%3D%22false%22%20Name%3D%22Dark%20List%20Accent%203%22%3E%3C%2Fw%3ALsdException%3E%0A%20%20%3Cw%3ALsdException%20Locked%3D%22false%22%20Priority%3D%2271%22%20SemiHidden%3D%22false%22%0A%20%20%20UnhideWhenUsed%3D%22false%22%20Name%3D%22Colorful%20Shading%20Accent%203%22%3E%3C%2Fw%3ALsdException%3E%0A%20%20%3Cw%3ALsdException%20Locked%3D%22false%22%20Priority%3D%2272%22%20SemiHidden%3D%22false%22%0A%20%20%20UnhideWhenUsed%3D%22false%22%20Name%3D%22Colorful%20List%20Accent%203%22%3E%3C%2Fw%3ALsdException%3E%0A%20%20%3Cw%3ALsdException%20Locked%3D%22false%22%20Priority%3D%2273%22%20SemiHidden%3D%22false%22%0A%20%20%20UnhideWhenUsed%3D%22false%22%20Name%3D%22Colorful%20Grid%20Accent%203%22%3E%3C%2Fw%3ALsdException%3E%0A%20%20%3Cw%3ALsdException%20Locked%3D%22false%22%20Priority%3D%2260%22%20SemiHidden%3D%22false%22%0A%20%20%20UnhideWhenUsed%3D%22false%22%20Name%3D%22Light%20Shading%20Accent%204%22%3E%3C%2Fw%3ALsdException%3E%0A%20%20%3Cw%3ALsdException%20Locked%3D%22false%22%20Priority%3D%2261%22%20SemiHidden%3D%22false%22%0A%20%20%20UnhideWhenUsed%3D%22false%22%20Name%3D%22Light%20List%20Accent%204%22%3E%3C%2Fw%3ALsdException%3E%0A%20%20%3Cw%3ALsdException%20Locked%3D%22false%22%20Priority%3D%2262%22%20SemiHidden%3D%22false%22%0A%20%20%20UnhideWhenUsed%3D%22false%22%20Name%3D%22Light%20Grid%20Accent%204%22%3E%3C%2Fw%3ALsdException%3E%0A%20%20%3Cw%3ALsdException%20Locked%3D%22false2018-19 CEP 52  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information %22%20Priority%3D%2263%22%20SemiHidden%3D%22false%22%0A%20%20%20UnhideWhenUsed%3D%22false%22%20Name%3D%22Medium%20Shading%201%20Accent%204%22%3E%3C%2Fw%3ALsdException%3E%0A%20%20%3Cw%3ALsdException%20Locked%3D%22false%22%20Priority%3D%2264%22%20SemiHidden%3D%22false%22%0A%20%20%20UnhideWhenUsed%3D%22false%22%20Name%3D%22Medium%20Shading%202%20Accent%204%22%3E%3C%2Fw%3ALsdException%3E%0A%20%20%3Cw%3ALsdException%20Locked%3D%22false%22%20Priority%3D%2265%22%20SemiHidden%3D%22false%22%0A%20%20%20UnhideWhenUsed%3D%22false%22%20Name%3D%22Medium%20List%201%20Accent%204%22%3E%3C%2Fw%3ALsdException%3E%0A%20%20%3Cw%3ALsdException%20Locked%3D%22false%22%20Priority%3D%2266%22%20SemiHidden%3D%22false%22%0A%20%20%20UnhideWhenUsed%3D%22false%22%20Name%3D%22Medium%20List%202%20Accent%204%22%3E%3C%2Fw%3ALsdException%3E%0A%20%20%3Cw%3ALsdException%20Locked%3D%22false%22%20Priority%3D%2267%22%20SemiHidden%3D%22false%22%0A%20%20%20UnhideWhenUsed%3D%22false%22%20Name%3D%22Medium%20Grid%201%20Accent%204%22%3E%3C%2Fw%3ALsdException%3E%0A%20%20%3Cw%3ALsdException%20Locked%3D%22false%22%20Priority%3D%2268%22%20SemiHidden%3D%22false%22%0A%20%20%20UnhideWhenUsed%3D%22false%22%20Name%3D%22Medium%20Grid%202%20Accent%204%22%3E%3C%2Fw%3ALsdException%3E%0A%20%20%3Cw%3ALsdException%20Locked%3D%22false%22%20Priority%3D%2269%22%20SemiHidden%3D%22false%22%0A%20%20%20UnhideWhenUsed%3D%22false%22%20Name%3D%22Medium%20Grid%203%20Accent%204%22%3E%3C%2Fw%3ALsdException%3E%0A%20%20%3Cw%3ALsdException%20Locked%3D%22false%22%20Priority%3D%2270%22%20SemiHidden%3D%22false%22%0A%20%20%20UnhideWhenUsed%3D%22false%22%20Name%3D%22Dark%20List%20Accent%204%22%3E%3C%2Fw%3ALsdException%3E%0A%20%20%3Cw%3ALsdException%20Locked%3D%22false%22%20Priority%3D%2271%22%20SemiHidden%3D%22false%22%0A%20%20%20UnhideWhenUsed%3D%22false%22%20Name%3D%22Colorful%20Shading%20Accent%204%22%3E%3C%2Fw%3ALsdException%3E%0A%20%20%3Cw%3ALsdException%20Locked%3D%22false%22%20Priority%3D%2272%22%20SemiHidden%3D%22false%22%0A%20%20%20UnhideWhenUsed%3D%22false%22%20Name%3D%22Colorful%20List%20Accent%204%22%3E%3C%2Fw%3ALsdException%3E%0A%20%20%3Cw%3ALsdException%20Locked%3D%22false%22%20Priority%3D%2273%22%20SemiHidden%3D%22false%22%0A%20%20%20UnhideWhenUsed%3D%22false%22%20Name%3D%22Colorful%20Grid%20Accent%204%22%3E%3C%2Fw%3ALsdException%3E%0A%20%20%3Cw%3ALsdException%20Locked%3D%22false%22%20Priority%3D%2260%22%20SemiHidden%3D%22false%22%0A%20%20%20UnhideWhenUsed%3D%22false%22%20Name%3D%22Light%20Shading%20Accent%205%22%3E%3C%2Fw%3ALsdException%3E%0A%20%20%3Cw%3ALsdException%20Locked%3D%22false%22%20Priority%3D%2261%22%20SemiHidden%3D%22false%22%0A%20%20%20UnhideWhenUsed%3D%22false%22%20Name%3D%22Light%20List%20Accent%205%22%3E%3C%2Fw%3ALsdException%3E%0A%20%20%3Cw%3ALsdException%20Locked%3D%22false%22%20Priority%3D%2262%22%20SemiHidden%3D%22false%22%0A%20%20%20UnhideWhenUsed%3D%22false%22%20Name%3D%22Light%20Grid%20Accent%205%22%3E%3C%2Fw%3ALsdException%3E%0A%20%20%3Cw%3ALsdException%20Locked%3D%22false%22%20Priority%3D%2263%22%20SemiHidden%3D%22false%22%0A%20%20%20UnhideWhenUsed%3D%22false%22%20Name%3D%22Medium%20Shading%201%20Accent%205%22%3E%3C%2Fw%3ALsdException%3E%0A%20%20%3Cw%3ALsdException%20Locked%3D%22false%22%20Priority%3D%2264%22%20SemiHidden%3D%22false%22%0A%20%20%20UnhideWhenUsed%3D%22false%22%20Name%3D%22Medium%20Shading%202%20Accent%205%22%3E%3C%2Fw%3ALsdException%3E%0A%20%20%3Cw%3ALsdException%20Locked%3D%22false%22%20Priority%3D%2265%22%20SemiHidden%3D%22false%22%0A%20%20%20UnhideWhenUsed%3D%22false%22%20Name%3D%22Medium%20List%201%20Accent%205%22%3E%3C%2Fw%3ALsdException%3E%0A%20%20%3Cw%3ALsdException%20Locked%3D%22false%22%20Priority%3D%2266%22%20SemiHidden%3D%22false%22%0A%20%20%20UnhideWhenUsed%3D%22false%22%20Name%3D%22Medium%20List%202%20Accent%205%22%3E%3C%2Fw%3ALsdException%3E%0A%20%20%3Cw%3ALsdException%20Locked%3D%22false%22%20Priority%3D%2267%22%20SemiHidden%3D%22false%22%0A%20%20%20UnhideWhenUsed%3D%22false%22%20Name%3D%22Medium%20Grid%201%20Accent%205%22%3E%3C%2Fw%3ALsdException%3E%2018-19 CEP 53  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information 0A%20%20%3Cw%3ALsdException%20Locked%3D%22false%22%20Priority%3D%2268%22%20SemiHidden%3D%22false%22%0A%20%20%20UnhideWhenUsed%3D%22false%22%20Name%3D%22Medium%20Grid%202%20Accent%205%22%3E%3C%2Fw%3ALsdException%3E%0A%20%20%3Cw%3ALsdException%20Locked%3D%22false%22%20Priority%3D%2269%22%20SemiHidden%3D%22false%22%0A%20%20%20UnhideWhenUsed%3D%22false%22%20Name%3D%22Medium%20Grid%203%20Accent%205%22%3E%3C%2Fw%3ALsdException%3E%0A%20%20%3Cw%3ALsdException%20Locked%3D%22false%22%20Priority%3D%2270%22%20SemiHidden%3D%22false%22%0A%20%20%20UnhideWhenUsed%3D%22false%22%20Name%3D%22Dark%20List%20Accent%205%22%3E%3C%2Fw%3ALsdException%3E%0A%20%20%3Cw%3ALsdException%20Locked%3D%22false%22%20Priority%3D%2271%22%20SemiHidden%3D%22false%22%0A%20%20%20UnhideWhenUsed%3D%22false%22%20Name%3D%22Colorful%20Shading%20Accent%205%22%3E%3C%2Fw%3ALsdException%3E%0A%20%20%3Cw%3ALsdException%20Locked%3D%22false%22%20Priority%3D%2272%22%20SemiHidden%3D%22false%22%0A%20%20%20UnhideWhenUsed%3D%22false%22%20Name%3D%22Colorful%20List%20Accent%205%22%3E%3C%2Fw%3ALsdException%3E%0A%20%20%3Cw%3ALsdException%20Locked%3D%22false%22%20Priority%3D%2273%22%20SemiHidden%3D%22false%22%0A%20%20%20UnhideWhenUsed%3D%22false%22%20Name%3D%22Colorful%20Grid%20Accent%205%22%3E%3C%2Fw%3ALsdException%3E%0A%20%20%3Cw%3ALsdException%20Locked%3D%22false%22%20Priority%3D%2260%22%20SemiHidden%3D%22false%22%0A%20%20%20UnhideWhenUsed%3D%22false%22%20Name%3D%22Light%20Shading%20Accent%206%22%3E%3C%2Fw%3ALsdException%3E%0A%20%20%3Cw%3ALsdException%20Locked%3D%22false%22%20Priority%3D%2261%22%20SemiHidden%3D%22false%22%0A%20%20%20UnhideWhenUsed%3D%22false%22%20Name%3D%22Light%20List%20Accent%206%22%3E%3C%2Fw%3ALsdException%3E%0A%20%20%3Cw%3ALsdException%20Locked%3D%22false%22%20Priority%3D%2262%22%20SemiHidden%3D%22false%22%0A%20%20%20UnhideWhenUsed%3D%22false%22%20Name%3D%22Light%20Grid%20Accent%206%22%3E%3C%2Fw%3ALsdException%3E%0A%20%20%3Cw%3ALsdException%20Locked%3D%22false%22%20Priority%3D%2263%22%20SemiHidden%3D%22false%22%0A%20%20%20UnhideWhenUsed%3D%22false%22%20Name%3D%22Medium%20Shading%201%20Accent%206%22%3E%3C%2Fw%3ALsdException%3E%0A%20%20%3Cw%3ALsdException%20Locked%3D%22false%22%20Priority%3D%2264%22%20SemiHidden%3D%22false%22%0A%20%20%20UnhideWhenUsed%3D%22false%22%20Name%3D%22Medium%20Shading%202%20Accent%206%22%3E%3C%2Fw%3ALsdException%3E%0A%20%20%3Cw%3ALsdException%20Locked%3D%22false%22%20Priority%3D%2265%22%20SemiHidden%3D%22false%22%0A%20%20%20UnhideWhenUsed%3D%22false%22%20Name%3D%22Medium%20List%201%20Accent%206%22%3E%3C%2Fw%3ALsdException%3E%0A%20%20%3Cw%3ALsdException%20Locked%3D%22false%22%20Priority%3D%2266%22%20SemiHidden%3D%22false%22%0A%20%20%20UnhideWhenUsed%3D%22false%22%20Name%3D%22Medium%20List%202%20Accent%206%22%3E%3C%2Fw%3ALsdException%3E%0A%20%20%3Cw%3ALsdException%20Locked%3D%22false%22%20Priority%3D%2267%22%20SemiHidden%3D%22false%22%0A%20%20%20UnhideWhenUsed%3D%22false%22%20Name%3D%22Medium%20Grid%201%20Accent%206%22%3E%3C%2Fw%3ALsdException%3E%0A%20%20%3Cw%3ALsdException%20Locked%3D%22false%22%20Priority%3D%2268%22%20SemiHidden%3D%22false%22%0A%20%20%20UnhideWhenUsed%3D%22false%22%20Name%3D%22Medium%20Grid%202%20Accent%206%22%3E%3C%2Fw%3ALsdException%3E%0A%20%20%3Cw%3ALsdException%20Locked%3D%22false%22%20Priority%3D%2269%22%20SemiHidden%3D%22false%22%0A%20%20%20UnhideWhenUsed%3D%22false%22%20Name%3D%22Medium%20Grid%203%20Accent%206%22%3E%3C%2Fw%3ALsdException%3E%0A%20%20%3Cw%3ALsdException%20Locked%3D%22false%22%20Priority%3D%2270%22%20SemiHidden%3D%22false%22%0A%20%20%20UnhideWhenUsed%3D%22false%22%20Name%3D%22Dark%20List%20Accent%206%22%3E%3C%2Fw%3ALsdException%3E%0A%20%20%3Cw%3ALsdException%20Locked%3D%22false%22%20Priority%3D%2271%22%20SemiHidden%3D%22false%22%0A%20%20%20UnhideWhenUsed%3D%22false%22%20Name%3D%22Colorful%20Shading%20Accent%206%22%3E%3C%2Fw%3ALsdException%3E%0A%20%20%3Cw%3ALsdException%20Locked%3D%22false%22%20Priority%3D%2272%22%20SemiHidden%3D%22false%22%0A%20%20%20UnhideWhenUsed%3D%22false%22%20Name%3D%22Colorful%20List%20Accent%206%22%3E%2018-19 CEP 54  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information 3C%2Fw%3ALsdException%3E%0A%20%20%3Cw%3ALsdException%20Locked%3D%22false%22%20Priority%3D%2273%22%20SemiHidden%3D%22false%22%0A%20%20%20UnhideWhenUsed%3D%22false%22%20Name%3D%22Colorful%20Grid%20Accent%206%22%3E%3C%2Fw%3ALsdException%3E%0A%20%20%3Cw%3ALsdException%20Locked%3D%22false%22%20Priority%3D%2219%22%20SemiHidden%3D%22false%22%0A%20%20%20UnhideWhenUsed%3D%22false%22%20QFormat%3D%22true%22%20Name%3D%22Subtle%20Emphasis%22%3E%3C%2Fw%3ALsdException%3E%0A%20%20%3Cw%3ALsdException%20Locked%3D%22false%22%20Priority%3D%2221%22%20SemiHidden%3D%22false%22%0A%20%20%20UnhideWhenUsed%3D%22false%22%20QFormat%3D%22true%22%20Name%3D%22Intense%20Emphasis%22%3E%3C%2Fw%3ALsdException%3E%0A%20%20%3Cw%3ALsdException%20Locked%3D%22false%22%20Priority%3D%2231%22%20SemiHidden%3D%22false%22%0A%20%20%20UnhideWhenUsed%3D%22false%22%20QFormat%3D%22true%22%20Name%3D%22Subtle%20Reference%22%3E%3C%2Fw%3ALsdException%3E%0A%20%20%3Cw%3ALsdException%20Locked%3D%22false%22%20Priority%3D%2232%22%20SemiHidden%3D%22false%22%0A%20%20%20UnhideWhenUsed%3D%22false%22%20QFormat%3D%22true%22%20Name%3D%22Intense%20Reference%22%3E%3C%2Fw%3ALsdException%3E%0A%20%20%3Cw%3ALsdException%20Locked%3D%22false%22%20Priority%3D%2233%22%20SemiHidden%3D%22false%22%0A%20%20%20UnhideWhenUsed%3D%22false%22%20QFormat%3D%22true%22%20Name%3D%22Book%20Title%22%3E%3C%2Fw%3ALsdException%3E%0A%20%20%3Cw%3ALsdException%20Locked%3D%22false%22%20Priority%3D%2237%22%20Name%3D%22Bibliography%22%3E%3C%2Fw%3ALsdException%3E%0A%20%20%3Cw%3ALsdException%20Locked%3D%22false%22%20Priority%3D%2239%22%20QFormat%3D%22true%22%20Name%3D%22TOC%20Heading%22%3E%3C%2Fw%3ALsdException%3E%0A%20%3C%2Fw%3ALatentStyles%3E%0A%3C%2Fxml%3E%3C!%5Bendif%5D%2D%2D%3E--><!--{cke_protected}{C}%3C!%2D%2D%5Bif%20gte%20mso%2010%5D%3E%0A%3Cstyle%3E%0A%20%2F*%20Style%20Definitions%20*%2F%0A%20table.MsoNormalTable%0A%09%7Bmso-style-name%3A%22Table%20Normal%22%3B%0A%09mso-tstyle-rowband-size%3A0%3B%0A%09mso-tstyle-colband-size%3A0%3B%0A%09mso-style-noshow%3Ayes%3B%0A%09mso-style-priority%3A99%3B%0A%09mso-style-parent%3A%22%22%3B%0A%09mso-padding-alt%3A0in%205.4pt%200in%205.4pt%3B%0A%09mso-para-margin-top%3A0in%3B%0A%09mso-para-margin-right%3A0in%3B%0A%09mso-para-margin-bottom%3A10.0pt%3B%0A%09mso-para-margin-left%3A0in%3B%0A%09line-height%3A115%25%3B%0A%09mso-pagination%3Awidow-orphan%3B%0A%09font-size%3A11.0pt%3B%0A%09font-family%3A%22Calibri%22%2C%22sans-serif%22%3B%0A%09mso-ascii-font-family%3ACalibri%3B%0A%09mso-ascii-theme-font%3Aminor-latin%3B%0A%09mso-hansi-font-family%3ACalibri%3B%0A%09mso-hansi-theme-font%3Aminor-latin%3B%7D%0A%3C%2Fstyle%3E%0A%3C!%5Bendif%5D%2D%2D%3E--> Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: The ENL teacher will be provided professional development to support and enhance their understanding and practice in the teaching instruction of ELLs. PDs will be taken through the 2018-19 CEP 55  Part C: Professional Development NYS/NYC Regional Bilingual Education Resource Network, and are free for all DOE employees. The ENL teacher will attend PDs hosted by Brooklyn North Field Support. The PDs will be on 10/25/18, 11/20/18, 1/17/19, 2/14/19 and 3/14/19. A copy of the agenda and a certificate of participation will be placed in the Title III binder to track all PD. The PDs will cover new ENL policy, strategies for addressing testing and maintenance of ENL data, and instructional strategies . Mr. Yu, ESL teacher, to attend an Orton Gillingham training. This PD will instruct him in how to support phonetic awareness and spelling conventions for the ENL student. The ENL teacher will then turnkey the PD to the entire staff during Monday PD time. Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: P.S. 38 strives to have all parents engrossed in their child’s education. The rationale is to give our ELL parents a better understanding of their child’s grade level expectations, the components of the NYSESLAT and State tests and empower them to assist in their child’s education. Parents are invited into the classroom in November to meet the teacher and review expectations. . Parents are also given the opportunity to speak with each provider and ask questions. Interpreters are available during these meetings to ensure parents are able to understand and communicate. Parents will also be invited to two workshops hosted by the ENL teacher Yuanzhu Yu. These workshops are aimed to create a public forum to answer commonly asked questions about the ENL programs. The first workshop on November 1, 2018 will provide information on the Title III Afterschool Program. The second workshop on March 14, 2019 will provide information on the NYSESLAT and other state tests. Parents and students will also be invited to a cultural celebration ( New Lunar Year) with food and festivities on February 1, 2019. In house interpreters will be on hand during all parent interactions. Parents will be notified of activities via notices, emails, and phone all in their chosen preferred home language. Parents will sign in when they arrive at each event. All attendance sheets, agendas and invitations in the parent’s preferred home language will be saved in the Title III binder. During those activities, Mr.Yu and Ms.Leong will serve as interpreters for our Chinese families. Ms. Lindsey and Ms.Carrion will serve as translators for our Spanish speaking families . Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits) $8, 867.52 2018-19 CEP 56 Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. Per session for two certified teachers-Yuanzhu Yu, TESOL K-Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff $1,075 and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other $1120 2,473.20 F & P Leveled Literacy Intervention Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. 12 and Nicole Rusin, Special ED/Gen Ed/ ENL Extension (January 2019) 2 teachers x 24 sessions x 2 hours x $60.65= 5,822.40 Per session for one supervisor, Jacqueline Smith 24 sessions x 2 hours x $63.44= $3,045.12 Orton-Gillingham Training through the Multisensory Institute November 12-16 2018 8-3:30 To be put towards Parent Involvement and will include: on site interpreters for meetings/workshops and materials for workshops and celebrations The extra professional funding will be provided by the school. TOTAL $12,508 2018-19 CEP 57  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 15 School Name The Pacific School Borough Brooklyn School Number 038 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Yolanda Ramirez Coach type here ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Yuanzhu Yu Teacher/Subject Area Monica Padilla Teacher/Subject Area type here Related-Service Provider type here Superintendent Anita Skop Assistant Principal type here Coach type here School Counselor Hobi Klapuri Parent type here Parent Coordinator Hasan Abdus Salaam Field Support Center Staff Member type here Other (Name and Title) type here C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 1 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification 0 Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 1 1 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program 0 Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 2018-19 CEP 58 Total number of ELLs ELLs as share of total student population (%) %  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 0 1 2 4 3 Lang. na na na na na na Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? Paste response to questions here: The NYSESLAT, NYSETELL, Fountas and Pinnell, TCRWP, Ready Gen and Go Math periodic assessments are the formative and curriculum-embedded assessments being used to guide instructional planning for ELLs. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? In order to support this effort, first the ENL teacher identifies all the ELLs and their current levels. The ENL teacher then shares this information with the general education teachers. Each grade level then works in teacher teams to plan and assess all students. The administration schedules a designated time when the teachers will assess their colleague’s students. This data is then handed into administration, inputted into our assessment tool and reviewed during teaching team meetings. 2018-19 CEP 59  3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? Paste response to question here: The early literacy skills of our ELL students are assessed with TCRWP running records to assess their reading levels. This assessment identifies baseline, progress and areas of need. In writing we use Ready Gen end of unit assessments and teacher made benchmark assessments to assess growth and areas of need.A variety of assessments are used in the upper grades 3-5 to measure baseline, growth and areas of need which include: Teacher College running records, teacher made bench mark assessments in writing, periodic ITA’s and diagnostic and informal and formal assessments in Reading and Writing. The NYSESLAT is used to show growth at the end of the year and provide a baseline in September. The NYSITELL is used as a baseline. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? Staff may request individual cases or class/grade level situation to be reviewed by the SIT team by filling out and submitting a request for intervention form to Naida Fernandez (RTI Coordinator). The team meets weekly to discuss submitted requests. The form for intervention contains information such as academic progress, test scores, assessments (formal and informal), reading levels and any other concerns that may affect academic progress. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] Paste response to question here: The SIT/PPT takes into consideration the RTI framework and analyzes the number of years the student has been in the ENL program, English and home language literacy, SIFE status, English and home language proficiency needs of long-term ELLs, NYSESLAT results, ENL teacher recommendations, content teacher recommendations, student samples and parent/guardian requests.The team uses all this information to recommend services and create an intervention plan. This plan includes: parent contact, specific instructions, progress monitoring and follow up with the teachers and parents. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. Paste response to question here: The school uses the ELL Data Analysis Tool to measure the ELL program’s progress, to analyze the students that are at risk and to see the reasons why they may be at risk. The RLAT is used to measure growth in each modality at the end of the year and provides a baseline and areas of need for the upcoming year. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? In order to ensure this data is disseminated and used to adjust programs, once a week general education teachers teaching the same grade level have a common prep and meet with administration to review data and plan together. The Monday time after school is also used for teacher teams to work together to review data and plan together. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. The ENL program will meet all mandates of CR-154. Entering and Emerging students will receive 180 minutes of Stand-Alone ENL provided by the certified TESOL teacher and 180 minutes of Integrated ENL provided by the ENL and 2018-19 CEP 60  the Common Branch Teachers. Transitioning students will receive 90 minutes of integrated service provided by the ENL and the Common Branch Teachers. They will also receive 90 minutes of Stand-Alone ENL service provided by the ENL teacher. Expanding students will receive 180 minutes of Integrated Service provided by the Common Branch and the ENL teachers. Commanding students will receive 90 minutes of Integrated Service provided by the ENL and the Common Branch teachers. All integrated ENL will be heterogeneous groups within the same grade level. Stand-Alone ENL will be homogeneous groups within the same group but will only include two consecutive grade spans. b. TBE program. If applicable. Paste response to questions here: c. DL program. If applicable. Paste response to questions here: 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? Paste response to questions here: The ENL teacher uses the RLAT to identify proficiency and grade levels of students. The guidelines set by CR Part 154.2 are then used to schedule the student’s ENL services. All ENL services are programmed into STARS. The timing and the grouping of the students was outlined in question 1. For Entering and Emerging students, HLA will be used 25 percent of the support time. HLA will still be used in the higher proficiency levels, but to a lesser degree. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. Paste response here: The Integrated ENL will be taught through the SIOP model. The ENL and the Common Branch teacher will collaboratively lesson plan to meet the needs of all the students in the classroom. The ENL teacher will provide the scaffolds to meet the needs of the ELLs during the lesson. This could include any of the following: adapted readings, words glossaries in their home language, descriptive charts, translations and visuals. The ENL and the Common Branch teacher will deliver the lesson as a team. The ENL teacher will use the Stand-Alone ENL time to deliver explicit instruction based on the Common Core Language Standards and the needs of the students and will base these lessons on the content learned in class. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? Paste response to question here: Children that are identified to have Spanish as a home language and qualify for services are also given the Spanish-LAB. Throughout the school year 25 percent of service time is spent on HLA. Translations and interpretations are used in the classroom to assist the ELLS. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status Paste response to questions here: a.Sife To meet the needs of SIFE students PS 38 builds a supportive environment that responds to the social, cultural and linguistic needs of all students. In the classroom lessons are taught through the SIOP model. This helps to build on the student’s prior knowledge and provides scaffolds throughout the lesson. The classrooms are also print rich environments with lots of visuals, while new vocabulary is slowly introduced. Students are lead through a hands-on learning experience so that the students are physically involved in their learning. Students are given many chances to communicate through whatever means they feel 2018-19 CEP 61  comfortable: speaking, drawing, acting, miming or hand gestures. Students are also encouraged to communicate in their preferred language with any staff and students who also know that language. b. Newcomer Newcomers are also met with a supportive environment that meets the students’ social, cultural and linguistic needs. Newcomers will receive 180 minutes of Integrated Service following the SIOP model. The home language and visuals are incorporated into the lessons. New students will be paired with a buddy to ensure a positive social adjustment. Newcomers will also receive 180 minutes of Stand-Alone ENL. This service time will focus on teaching the fundamentals: foundations, vocabulary and simple sentence structures. A large portion of the service time will be spent on building oral language. c.Developing Developing students will receive a combination of Integrated and Stand-Alone service. Building oral language will continue to be a focus. There will also be an emphasis on speaking, asking and answering questions. The complexity of the language will gradually increase as the students’ levels also increase. Interpretations will be used when needed to allow students to think at higher cognitive levels even if they can’t yet communicate in English at the same level. d. Long Term To meet the needs of Long Term ELLs a full evaluation of the student will take place. Data on the student will be collected and evaluated by the ENL and classroom teacher. IEPs, state test scores and running records will all be assessed to see where the students are struggling and determine the needs of the students. Each of the four modalities will be carefully analyzed and taken into consideration when planning. The ENL teacher and the classroom teacher will create an action plan together to help the students succeed. e. Former Ells up to two years after existing ELL status Former ELLs will receive Integrated Service. The ESOL teacher and the classroom teacher will plan together and co-teach to ensure the needs of the students are being met. Running records will be assessed to make sure the students are progressing on track 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? Paste response to question here: Our teachers of ELL-SWD’s use various materials such as Foundations, Ready Gen, and Treasure Chest for ELLs. Award Reading, Teachers College Writing Units of Study, Reader Rabbit, Leap Frog, Oral Language and Phonic Development Games. All materials that we use help our students with English Language Acquisition. The instructional strategies that teachers use include: ESL methodologies, scaffolding, modeling, bridging, retelling, schema, think aloud and turn and talk. Students are also provided with books in their native language and cultures. In the beginning of the school year, administration meets with the IEP specialist, Naida Fernandez to review the services mandated for all our ELLS-SWDs. To ensure that all students receive their mandated services, all support staff is supplied with their list of students and mandates. Support staff and administration work together to create a schedule to ensure that all ELL_SWDs receive services mandated by their IEP. A copy of the support staff schedule is provided to administration, the IEP specialist and the classroom teachers. ELLs-SWDs who’s IEP mandates bilingual instruction are provided with a bilingual paraprofessional to assist in the delivery of instructions. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? Paste response to question here: Our school uses curricular, instructional and scheduling flexibility to meet the diverse needs of ELL-SWD with the least restrictive environment in many ways. The SIT team monitors the progress of ELL-SWD throughout the year. The team meets weekly to review students. The team includes: Ms. Ramirez the Principal, Ms. Smith the Assistant Princepal, Ms. Fernandez the Special Ed. Specialist, , Mr.Yu the ENL teacher, Ms. Ernst the Speech Pathologist, Ms. Perry the Assistant principal and Ms. Besser the school psychologist. The team reviews all state assessments, running records and recommendations by the teacher to monitor the progress of the student. This monitoring is used by the team to make recommendations for the IEP to ensure 2018-19 CEP 62  the least restrictive environment is recommended. The team and the classroom teacher work together to determine if a 12-1-1, ICT or SETTS will best meet the needs of the students. The team also takes into consideration the impact the decisions will have on non-disabled peers. Paraprofessionals are used in the classroom to ensure all students have the opportunity to learn. All curriculum an instruction is developed and tweaked to the needs of our students based on assessments, observations and IEP mandates. Support services are provided to students through the push-in model as frequently as possible. Our ELL-SWDs in 12:1:1 classrooms participate in dance and gym clusters together with Gen Ed classes of the same grade. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. Paste response to question here: The targeted intervention program for ELLs in ELA, Math and other content areas is an after school program taught collaboratively with a common branch teacher, TESOL teacher and support staff. Students who did not make progress, received a level 1 or 2 on the ELA or Math state test, or did not score commanding on the NYSESLAT are targeted for intervention. Classroom teachers, the ENL teacher and administration work on developing instructional plans for ELL students to ensure they are being supported in the areas of concern based on assessments. The ENL teacher will provide 90 minutes of integrated ENL to provide transitioning students support. The ENL teacher collaborates and plans with classroom teachers to ensure that ENL strategies and methodologies are implemented. Junior Great Books will be considered for implementation this year. The program promotes oral language, reading skills such as text to text, text to self-connections, inferencing, prior knowledge and higher order critical thinking. The rationale for implementing the program is to provide ELL students with continuous oral language, listening, speaking development. This reading program incorporates the targeted reading skills shown to be the students’ weaknesses through analysis of the NYSESLAT. Students are also invited to attend extra help in ELA and Math on Saturdays through the school’s Pre-Power and Power Saturdays.All extra help is offered in English, but in the classrooms that afford students access to materials in their native language. Bilingual paraprofessionals are also available to provide interpretations as needed. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? Paste response to question here: The new programs that will be considered this upcoming school year are: Foundations for grades K-2, Ready Gen for all grades, Go Math for all grades and RAZ Kids. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? Paste response to question here: 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. Paste response to question here: All ELLs are provided the same opportunities as our English proficient population. They are invited to participate in all school programs such as Safety Nets (37.5), After school and Saturday programs. They are invited to all academic programs to ensure that they are receiving academic support in all areas that are needed. They are also invited to all extracurricular activities that include Ballroom Dancing, African dancing, violin and swimming classes during and after school to promote social interaction with their teachers and peers. Parents are notified of all programs available by letters in English as well as their preferred home language. School programs are also discussed during parent meetings. Translators work with all the teachers to ensure everyone is able to communicate. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. Paste response to question here: The instructional materials used to support our ELLs are Treasure Chest for ELLs specific for all grades, Leap Frog computer program for kindergarten to second grade and Reader Rabbit computer program for kindergarten to third grade students. Award Reading program is also used specifically for first grade. In addition all their to fifth grade ELL students have access to computers that have programs like Star Falls, Brain Pop and math games. All of the 2018-19 CEP 63  technology programs promote oral language, listening, reading and writing. Books in their native languages are available as well as books on tape. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Paste response to question here: Home language support is delivered in various ways. Many staff members speak languages other than English and include: Spanish, Mandarin, Cantonese and Arabic. All staff is made aware of the preferred home language and work diligently to ensure all information is translated or interpreted. Resource tools are available in their home language for support such as: bilingual dictionaries, glossaries, books in the home language, and computers and ipads for translations. Visual aides are also used frequently. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. Paste response to question here: All services are age and developmentally appropriate. Literature is available in our ELL students’ native languages. Books in native language are available for students to take home for their parents to read with them. The available books are about their native countries, holidays, celebrations, food and geography. Support services are scheduled to correspond to their grade level and resources are leveled to correspond to Ell’s age. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? Paste response to question here: 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). Paste response to question here: The parent coordinator or administration provides a school tour and an informal orientation to assist newly enrolled ELLS before the beginning of the school year. Parents are also given a list of community programs offered during the summer in the families’ home language. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? Paste response to question here: P.S. 38 offers Spanish to all students. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? Paste response to question here: Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? Paste response to question here: Our ENL teacher and classroom teachers attend professional development provided by the Office of DELLS, the teachers union and TEFOL. Fifty percent of PD for the ENL teacher is dedicated to ELL specific training. The ENL teacher turkeys the PD to ensure that fifteen percent of PD time is dedicated to ELL related topics for all common branch licensed teachers. Throughout the school year administration and staff attend various professional development on stratifies for ELL students in content 2018-19 CEP 64  areas of Reading, Writing and Math. Staff members that attended the professional development then turn-key all information to teachers and staff members during the allotted PD time. Support staff attends monthly professional development on strategies to support ELLs and SWDs. So far staff has attended PD on various topics such as: CR-154, Meeting the Needs of Diverse Learners in the Classroom, Reading and Writing non-fiction, Ready Gen and Go Math. Our Parent Coordinator also attends PD provided by the DOE. Paste response to question here: Teachers of ELLS are encouraged to attend PD with agencies that are contracted with the DOE. This ensures the PD will be common core aligned and teach strategies to support ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Language Standards. Teachers attend PD through various programs such as: The Office of DELLS, Teachers College and NYS TEFOL. The ENL teacher will also provide staff monthly ELL related to PD that focuses on strategies for teaching ELLs Common Core aligned curriculum. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. Paste response to question here: The school provides professional development to all teachers and administrators that specifically address the needs of ELLs.Fifty percent of PD for the ENL teacher, Mr. Yu, is dedicated to ELL specific training. Mr. Yu attends ELL related PD outside of the school and watches Webinars on ELL related topics. The ENL teacher turn-keys the PDs to ensure that fifteen percent of PD time is dedicated to ELL related topics for all common branch licensed teachers and administrators. Paste response to question here: All teachers are responsible for tracking their PD, saving agendas and monitoring their ELL PD time. The agendas are also saved by the Professional Development Committee. Common Branch teachers are also encouraged to view ELL related Webinars. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? Paste response to question here: The ENL teacher will hold mid-year individual family meetings to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results and language development needs in all content areas. Letters in be sent home explaining the meeting and asking parents to choose a time for a meeting that fits their schedule. The language translation unit will be used to have all letters needed for the meeting translated into the preferred language. All letters sent home will be copied and filed in the compliance binder. If a parent/guardian does not respond, a letter with a return receipt will be mailed to the home. All communication with parents is logged and filed in the ENL teacher’s parent involvement binder. Attendance for all meetings will be taken. Bilingual staff will be used to provide interpretations during the meeting. The T and I unit will also be used to provide interpretations for Mandarin speaking parents. Parents will sign an attendance sheet and fill out a questionnaire at the end of the meeting to rate the productivity of the meeting. All this information will be made available in the native language. All papers will be saved in the compliance binder. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Paste response to question here: Teachers use the Tuesday PD time to reach out to parents and create newsletters describing class updates. Bilingual staff is used to translate and provided interpretations. Our ELL parents are invited to all school activities. The T&I unit is used to translate all school related announcements that are sent home. Our monthly Principal’s Breakfast is a regular part of our work with our families. The breakfast is a forum for parents to ask questions, voice their concerns and opinions. Parents/Guardians also participate in monthly Spotlight on Learning sessions. Bilingual staff is used to provide interpretations during these meetings. In the fall the school hosts an international potluck dinner, and in the winter the school hosts a multicultural festival. Families are encouraged to share traditional foods, customs and celebrations at these gatherings. These nights focus on 2018-19 CEP 65  celebrating the diversity of our school community. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Paste response here: 2018-19 CEP 66 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Yolanda Ramirez, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 CEP 67  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: School DBN: Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Title Principal Assistant Principal Parent Coordinator ENL/Bilingual Teacher Parent Teacher/Subject Area Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach School Counselor Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 2018-19 CEP 68 2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools School Name: P.S. Superintendent: Anita Skop DBN: 15K038 The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Hassan Abdus Salaam Parent Coordinator no yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. The school will use the RAPL report from ATS, HLIS, and emergency blue cards to assess the language preferences of our families for both written and oral communication. In addition, communication between the LAC and families will also provide more information to ensure all families’ needs are met. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. 2018-19 CEP 69  Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral 2 802 18 84 0 0 Arabic English Spanish Chinese (any) Cantonese Mandarin .22 88.52 1.99 9.27 0 0 2 799 20 63 3 19 .22 88.19 2.21 6.95 .33 2.1 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. n/a Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. Emergency Blue Cards Counseling In School Afterschool Application Testing Information Calendar 1 1 1 1 NYC DOE supplies Done by organization NYC DOE supplies NYS DOE supplies 2018-19 CEP 70  Curriculum Night Invitation Parent Teacher Conference Title III AIS Invitation Power Saturday Invitation 2 2 1 1 NYC DOE supplies NYC DOE supplies Big Word Big Word 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to Two parent-teacher conferences and two curriculum nights. PTC November and March Curriculum Night September and May IEP meetings Varies Teachers use the parent engagement time to call parents and discuss the student’s academic performance. Held every Tuesday afternoon from 2:20-2:55 pm Administration and Guidance Counselor call home to discuss incidents and social and emotion needs. Varies according to needs provide interpretation service(s)? We have interpreters and translators for Spanish and Chinese speaking families. We also have access to use over the phone translators provided by NYC DOE. We have interpreters and translators for Spanish and Chinese speaking families. We also have access to over the phone translators provided by NYC DOE. We have interpreters and translators for Spanish and Chinese speaking families. We also have access to over the phone translators provided by NYC DOE. We have interpreters and translators for Spanish and Chinese speaking families. We also have access to over the phone translators provided by NYC DOE. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. In the event of an emergency our school uses the Konstella app to reach families. The app can be translated into several languages to fit the need of our individual families. 2018-19 CEP 71  Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Staff will be trained during Monday PD time to learn about Chancellor's Regulation A-663 and the resources that are available to them to meet the needs of our families. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) Section VII of the Chancellor's Regulations A-663 regarding parental notification requirements for translation and interpretation services is fulfilled by providing families with paper copies of the Parents’ Bill of Rights, Achieve NYC Guide and the Parent Guide to Language Access in their preferred language. The Language Access Coordinator receives the welcoming poster and language guides for security and ensures everything is in place. Also the Konstella app is used to alert our families to the resources available to them. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? The Language Access Coordinator has created a parent survey that has been translated to gather feedback from parents on the quality and availability of the services. Parents will fill out this survey during curriculum nights and parent-teacher conferences. 2018-19 CEP 72 
