2018-19 COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (CEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 13K056 School Name: P.S. 056 LEWIS H. LATIMER Principal: ERIC GRANDE 2018-19 CEP 1  Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 CEP 2  School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information Lewis H. Latimer 3313000010056 Pre-K - 5 School Number (DBN): 13k056 170 Gates Avenue, Brooklyn, New York, 11238 718-857-3149 Phone Number: 718-783-7379 Fax: Eric Grande egrande@schools.nyc.gov Email Address: School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Eric Grande Sharon Nicholson Tina Fleming Joan Hochman Tina Fleming n/a n/a n/a District Information Geographical District: 13 ZinaCooper Williams Superintendent: 355 Park Place, Brooklyn, New York 11238 Superintendent’s Office Address: Bfreeman6@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718-636-3284 Phone Number: 718-636-3266 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) 2018-19 CEP 3  Brooklyn North Bernadette Fitzgerald FSC: Executive Director’s Office Address: Executive Director: 131 Livingston Street,BrooklynNY 11201 BFitzge2@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 718-935-3954 Phone Number: 718-935-2382 Fax: 2018-19 CEP 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Eric Grande Sharon Nicholson Tina Fleming Joan Hochman Natalie Johnson Amy Orr *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/ Teacher Member/ Teacher Member/ Teacher 2018-19 CEP 5  Sara Flowers Keri Bertino Taylor Valentine Ali Coleman Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Member/ Teacher Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ 2018-19 CEP 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with 2018-19 CEP 7  the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement 2018-19 CEP 8  Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? PS 56 is a growing public school in Brooklyn, NY encompassing Pre-Kindergarten through 5th grade. We provide a nurturing and caring education experience for all children that focuses on engaging students in a wide variety of programs that tap into the students' talents and learning styles. At PS 56, we believe that all students can be leaders and pursue their talents and passions and it is our responsibility to provide a wide range of programs in order to ensure that this happens on a consistent basis throughout the year. In the classrooms, the teachers plan and teach 2018-19 CEP 9  lessons that facilitate authentic learning experiences in all content areas that are open ended, rigorous, and engaging. Finally, our school community is inclusive, warm and welcoming of all people, with a family orientated environment. In order to: Provide a nurturing and caring education experience for all children, our teachers implement the Leader in Me process, with the students learning about the 7 Habits of Highly Effective People throughout the school year. This teaching and learning occurs through direct instruction in the classrooms, through community engagement, through leadership roles in the classrooms, and through experiential learning. We have established a common language for leadership and positive peer interactions through the 7 Habits that are evident throughout the physical space, posted in classrooms and murals throughout the building. Our teachers facilitate lessons around the Habits, implement read alouds and utilize web-based resources. Through this process, our students are exemplifying the Habits throughout the school and in their community. In order to: Engage students in a wide variety of programs that tap into students' talents and learning styles, PS 56 offers a multidisciplinary approach to learning. This is achieved through authentic reading and writing experiences in a variety of genres, narrative, informational, and persuasive writing, so students can obtain information and comprehend text, apply and synthesize the information, and then to use their new understandings for creative endeavors. In mathematics, we develop students that can utilize multiple strategies for problem solving, so that students can adapt their learning and apply strategies in multiple contexts. In the content areas, we foster an ability for students to research, to experiment, and draw conclusions about the topics addressed. In order to: Establish PS 56 as an inclusive, warm and welcoming school environment, we open our doors to all students and families in order to diversify our students body, meet the needs of all children, from those with special needs, to English language learners, to gifted and talented students. We believe that students learn best when they interact, teach and learn from each other with a variety of racial and ethnic backgrounds, socioeconomic standing, and ability levels. PS 56 is representative of the greater community, and our strength is our ability to celebrate our differences in order to establish a cohesive singular school environment. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. PS 56 continues to grow as a school community with regards to student enrollment. Additionally, there is an increasing level of diversity and special programming is being initiated to meet the needs of all students. PS 56 has 261 students from Pre-Kindergarten through 5th grade. 53.6% of the population is male, while 46.3% of the population is female. 52.87% of the students are black, with 14.5% of the population Hispanic, while 24.52% are white. 3.07% are multiracial, 3.45% are Asian, 0.38% American Indian or Alaskan and 1.15% of the students are Native 2018-19 CEP 10  Hawaiian or other Pacific Islander. There are 13 English language learners in PS 56 and 58 students with Individual Education Plans, consisting of 22.2% of the student population. Within our Special Education population, 13.79 % of the children receive related services only. Thirty two percent of the students spend less than 20% of the week receiving services, while 17.24% of the students with IEPs spend more than 60% of the week in an Integrated Co-teaching class. Finally, 36.21% of the students with special needs receive support in a Self Contained classroom. Ps 56 is a Title 1 school. We utilize our Tile 1 funds to ensure that all of our students have a fair and equal opportunity to obtain a high quality education and reach proficiency on the state academic standards. Title 1 funds at PS 56 are used to support our professional development efforts within the school which trains teachers to plan and implement highly rigorous and engaged instruction for all children. Additionally, we fund a variety of arts programs to ensure that the children are provided with a well rounded educational experience that taps into their talents and areas of interest. Finally, our Title 1 funds support our children in ensuring that all students have adequate and quality instructional materials to support their learning. Our growth strategy entails creating a school environment that meets the needs of families and students of wide ranging races, ethnic and socioeconomic backgrounds. Beginning in September of 2017, our school initiated a "World Language Spanish" program at the kindergarten level and beginning in September of 2018, PS 56 will have both kindergarten and 1st graders in the program. Through this program, we seek to develop our students' ability to be multi-lingual, with the early stages of the program teaching fundamental Spanish language and progressively increasing the amount of Spanish taught as the students move up through the program. The ultimate goal of the program is to have Spanish proficient students when they leave PS 56 in 5th grade and to eventually convert the World Language Program to a Dual Language program once additional Spanish Proficient children enroll at greater numbers. Additionally, it is a philosophy of the school that 2nd language development supports high achievement overall. PS 56 also has an expanding Gifted and Talented program that begins in Kindergarten and will be up to the 4th grade at the start of the 2018-19 school year. Within this program, we have a variety of students with diverse backgrounds and learning styles, some classes which are also multiple grades. We believe that gifted students learn best when they are provided with contexts to pursue their gifts and are challenged in a variety of ways. First, we differentiate our Gifted classrooms in order to ensure that the students ability levels are being met on a daily basis. Next we "compact" our curriculum, meaning that for students when needed, we condense, modify, or streamline the regular curriculum to reduce repetition of mastered material. This frees up time for students to engage in enrichment activities and pursue their talents or areas of interest. Finally, we engage in Enrichment Clustering, where we establish specialized units of study in a variety of subject areas and carve out period of the day and week where children can select academic pursuits related to a theme or concept and purse their learning based on their strengths or what piques their interest. We also make a concerted effort to have integration throughout our school to ensure that students within this program do not feel that they are isolated within the school. Our Gifted and Talented teachers collaborate with general education students, we have events and programs that combine all programs, and in our upper grades we seek to mesh students into our Gifted and Talented program if there are available seats based on in house assessments. We have two self contained special education classes, K-2 and 3-5, as well as Special Education Teacher Support Services (SETSS), Occupational Therapy, Physical Therapy, a full time Guidance Counselor and speech services. At PS 56, we work to ensure that students with special needs are provided with the same education opportunities and engage in the same curriculum as all students in the building. With support and scaffolding, students with special 2018-19 CEP 11  needs can perform at the same level as students in the general education program and the work products and student outcomes demonstrate this. We also promote inclusion, with a partnership with a District 75 special education program by including students with special needs in our general education classes based on their IEP goals. Our academic program places a strong emphasis on developing our students' ability to persevere through complex tasks and to engage in inquiry and higher level thinking both independently and collaboratively with their peers. Beginning in the fall of 2017, we began to partner with and use resources from Columbia University's Teacher's College Reading and Writing Project. This partnership provided our staff with extensive professional development, instructional support and coaching by trained professionals in the field throughout the year. This support is aligned to the implementation of the "Units of Study" for reading and writing where students are reading and writing authentic texts in the genres of narrative, information, and persuasive. We follow a balanced literacy approach to reading and writing with a focus on mini-lessons that target specific reading and writing strategies, conferring, where teachers are meeting with students individually in order to diagnose specific areas of celebration and areas of need in order to move readers to higher levels, strategic read alouds, independent reading and in depth discussion and discourse. A focal point of our classroom is the class library, where students can access a variety of books, both fiction and non-fiction, that are at various reading levels and contain a variety of topics and genres. Students select books that excite them, pique their curiosity, help them visualize and imagine, and inspire them to engage in their communities and the world around them. Our school day begins with independent reading, while teachers meet with individual students or in small groups to discuss their reading, target specific skills and strategies that will help students raise their reading levels, and to support students in independently engaging in higher level thinking and inquiry. In order to provide students with various opportunities that allow children to explore their talents and pursue their passions in a number of different areas, our school offers a wide range of programming throughout the school year. PS 56 employs a full time dance instructor that sees students twice a week. Within these classes, Ms. Swan provides instruction in modern dance, tap dance, ballet, and other genres. She also has a Dance Company of selected students that meet during and after school, further honing in on special talent within the school building. These classes also provide students with much needed time for movement and exercise that is also needed throughout the school day. Through a partnership with Dancing Classrooms, our 4th and 5th grade students participate in ballroom dancing for approximately 4 months out of the school year. Through this program, the students experience instruction from a trained ballroom dancing instructor that teachers the students Meringue, Foxtrot, Waltz and other traditional dances. Additionally, this program emphasizes teamwork, positive socialization, and respect. Studio in a School provides a 5 month residency in visual arts. Studio provides a highly qualified visual arts instructor that teaches students in a number of media, including painting, clay, woodwork, and other media for 45 minutes once a week during the residency. The program culminates with an "Art Exhibition" where students and parents participate in a show of student work. Little Orchestra Society provides music instruction for a 5 month long residency where a visiting music teacher instructs students on music composition, with a focus on instrumentation, notation, scales, and other musical concepts. Students receive this instruction once a week for 5 months and culminates with a musical performance where students perform for their peers and parents with a visiting string quartet. All students at PS 56 participate in Studio in a School and Little Orchestra Society, to ensure that all children experience performance, music, and visual arts at some point during the school year. PS 56 prides itself on being a Wellness School. Through various practices and school programs, we ensure that our students gain an understanding of the concept that a healthy body results in a healthy mind where authentic learning can take place. As a result, we work with the program Wellness in the Schools, to teach healthy living to the students through hands on experiences and direct instruction. Beginning in the fall of 2017, our school became a full "Breakfast in the Classroom" school, where students eat with their peers in their classroom at the start of the school day. Research has shown that more students eat breakfast when in this capacity and the children feel better at the start of the day, thus improving instructional outcomes overall. We also work with School Foods to have a "Alternative Lunch Menu" that provides students with more healthy options, such as additional fruits and vegetables, whole grains, and other healthy options. We also grow our own vegetables in our school courtyard where fruit and vegetables are grown, in collaboration with our science teachers who teaches and works with students in the garden during the year. 2018-19 CEP 12  Finally, we implement Cookshop for Students and Families, a weekly healthy eating curriculum that teaches students about healthy food preparation and more healthy food choices. We partner with local grocers to deliver fresh food to enhance the lessons and allow for tastings by students. Additionally, Cookshop for Families invites parent to participate once a month in classes that mirror those received by the students in order to help the families to connect their learning and promote healthy living at home. During the 2018-2019 school year, PS 56 will be in the 3rd year of the Leader in Me process, aligned to Steven Covey's 7 Habits of Highly Effective People. Through this program, we focus on character development and education, establishing a school wide vision of leadership and positive contributions, and to develop a strong foundation for effective school culture that will elevate all aspects of our school, especially academic performance. We will have extensive professional development in this area so teachers become engaged in the program and develop in a collegial fashion our action plan for implementation school wide. Teachers will facilitate lessons and conversations around the 7 Habits throughout the year, we will conduct school wide celebrations to highlight our accomplishments, and invite parents into the school to learn about the process and engage in the program. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. PS 56 serves a diverse student body, with approximately 260 students in the building. Our school population consists of African American, Hispanic, White, Arabic, and Asian children. We serve students with special needs in self-contained and co-teaching classrooms, English Language Learners through ENL (English as a New Language) as well as students receiving SETTS services, Occupational Therapy, Speech, and other related services. We are expanding our Pre-Kindergarten program and we currently serve Talented and Gifted students in kindergarten through 4th grade. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. PS 56 made the most progress over the past year in the area of Rigorous Instruction, where we developed our curriculum in way that is customized, inclusive, motivating and aligned to the Common Core. The level of rigor was significantly improved as evidenced by the student work products, in particular with the volume and depth of the writing in a variety of genres, narrative, informational and persuasive writing. Through this process, the students developed critical thinking skills and developed their ability to problem solve in engaging activities. For the upcoming school year, we will focus on establishing ourselves as a highly effective team of Collaborative Teachers and staff. We strive to provide teachers with the opportunities to participate in collaborative professional development with a culture of respect and continuous improvement. We will accomplish this by:  Establishing an Instructional Leadership Team consisting of teachers, support staff and building leadership to ensure that are curriculum is aligned to the Common Core and that teachers are effectively planning and preparing lessons to meet the needs of all students  Establishing a Leader in Me Lighthouse team to address the level of implementation of the 7 Habits throughout the school and to monitor the school culture over the course of the school year.  Develop, with the teaching staff, a professional development plan for the school year which taps into the ability levels and areas of need throughout the school in a collaborative fashion, which will then serve to plan and implement the plan during the year. 2018-19 CEP 13  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 13K056 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration PK,0K,01,02,03,04,05 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 215 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 15 15 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 18 17 10 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 76.0% % Attendance Rate 70.7% % Reduced Lunch 5.6% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.0% 16.3% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 14.9% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 2.41 6% 12% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 26.7% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 80% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A N/A N/A N/A YES Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A YES High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 18 18 91.5% 3.7% 20.0% 65.1% 1.9% 1.9% 0 18% 5.6 20.2% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No YES N/A N/A N/A YES NO N/A N/A N/A NO YES N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 CEP 14  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 1. As a Teacher's College aligned school, we implement a rigorous approach to teaching reading and writing that emphasizes reading and writing authentic literature and non-fiction works so students can think deeply about a topic or tap into their creativity in a variety of genres. Our teachers and support staff worked together this year to develop our curriculum so that it is customized, inclusive, motivating and aligned to Common Core. The level of rigor improved and the students' ability to read and write with high levels of stamina and volume. As a result:  In our testing grades, we demonstrated a 4% increase in the number of students reading at or above grade level in June of 2018 as compared to the previous year as measured by our Teacher's College Independent Reading Assessment.  An average of 35% of our 4th and 5th graders reading at or above grade level as per the June assessment as compared to 33% from the previous year. 2. The priority needs that will be addressed are the teaching practices that reflect a set beliefs that students learn best when they engage in conversation, discourse and collaboration with their peers and teachers. This is a practice that is inconsistent across classrooms within the school building. As per our 2017-2018 Quality Review, "Though teaching practices are informed by the Danielson Framework for Teaching, students do not yet consistently produce meaningful student work products and there are uneven levels of student thinking and participation. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 70% of students in grades 3-5 will increase their reading levels at least 4 reading levels, as measured by Teachers College Independent Reading Assessment. 2018-19 CEP 15  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? 1. Teacher teams will meet to plan reading and writing instruction across grades and review and revise curriculum to ensure that units and lessons are fully aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS). K-5 K-5 2. Teacher teams will use the professional book "Conferring with Readers" and "Teaching Reading in Small Groups" to establish professional learning communities. 3. Staff developers will be utilized to facilitate professional development and create lab sites so teachers can participate in model lessons and intervistations to view best practices and provide feedback. Instructional Leadership Team will work with SETTS teacher and special education teachers to modify unit and lesson plans to ensure that students with special needs are provided with appropriate supports, such as visual aids, modified reading material, and/or tiered assignments. K-5 K-5 Sept. 2018- February 2019 classroom teachers, instructional leadership team, staff developers Sept. 2018-June 2019 classroom teachers, SETTS Teacher, Literacy Coach (F-Status) Instructional Leadership Team will meet twice per month with the building administration in order plan the above mentioned activities and adjust the action plan as needed. K-5 Sept 2018-June 2019 administration, instructional leadership team - 3b – Parent and Family Engagement - - - How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. By June of 2019, our staff will facilitate at least 5 parent workshops focusing on developing their understanding of Common Core expectations and ways to support their children's progress at home. These workshops will be facilitated by members of the instructional team, classroom teachers, and the Parent Coordinator. These will take place bi-monthly, beginning with the Curriculum Night in September. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment 2018-19 CEP 16  Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Teachers College Reading and Writing Kits, educational consultants, professional books, common planning time, substitute teacher to support teacher coverage to participate in professional development Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. As of February of 2019, 80% of the students in the school in grades 3-5 will demonstrate at least 2 levels of progress according to the Teachers College Running Records assessments, compared to the October 2018 baseline assessment. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) TC Independent Reading Assessment (Running Records) Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 17  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? 1. At PS 56, we have established a school culture that is inclusive of all students, celebrates our diversity, and highlights students for their individuality and talents. The vehicle we utilize as the driving force of this work is the Leader in Me, with the 7 Habits as our common language for leadership and positive peer interactions.  According to our 2017-2018 School Quality Guide, 93% of teachers say that they apply their knowledge of parents' various cultural backgrounds when collaborating with them regarding their child's educational progress.  100% of pre-k through 5 teachers say that students are safe in the hallways, bathrooms, locker rooms, and cafeteria of their school. Finally, 97% of families say that they feel respected by their child's teachers.  2. The priority needs that will be addressed this goal are the establishment of a supportive environment that meets the needs of all stakeholders in the building, inclusive of the students, teachers and parents of the school. PS 56 must be a school community that is caring, responsive, and adaptive to the diverse needs of all. According to our School Quality Guide survey results, our Survey Element Scores increased from 2.70 in 2017 to 3.49 in 2018, and our Trust indicator increased from 2.92 in 2017 to 3.16 in 2018. This can be attributed to the following:  The year 2 implementation of the Leader in Me process throughout the school community. Our teachers, students, and staff have all participated in multiple trainings and events addressing the 7 Habits in order to create a more positive and inclusive school culture for everyone  Parents have participated in Leader in Me workshops and presentation in various meetings and school events to further instill the Habits and the school vision among parent members.  The Leader in Me Lighthouse Team, consisting of classroom teachers, support staff, and guidance counselors have met regularly in order to increase the level of implementation from year to year.  Power Brain, a program on brain development, social emotional well being, and wellness has been initiated in the spring of 2018 to support teachers and students in improving student performance and classroom climate through brain excercises and movement. 3. School Leadership Team members and the School Lighthouse Team members meet regularly throughout the school year to analyze data and determine next steps to address the school climate and create action plans to address specific needs. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the 2018-19 CEP 18  identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June of 2019, the Survey Element Scores for "Supportive Environment" will increase by 5 tenths as measured by the School Quality Guide survey results, from 3.49 to a minimum of 3.90. 2018-19 CEP 19  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? - All staff will be trained in the Leader in Me during the November Professional Development Day in the fall of 2018. Pre-K - 5 Year long Lighthouse Team, administration, School Leadership Team - Leader in Me Lighthouse team will meet monthly to discuss the LIM Action Plans and the implementation of the plan over the course of the school year. - Leader in Me Leadership Days will be held twice during the school year in order to celebrate leadership and provide parents and community members with a greater understanding of the Habits and the impact on the school. - Leader in Me Leadership Days will be held twice during the school year in order to celebrate leadership and provide parents and community members with a greater understanding of the Habits and the impact on the school. - Power Brain and Move to Improve practices will be planned and facilitated in all classrooms in order to improve classroom tone and climate. Students with disabilities and English Language Learners will be provided with support through small group instruction, conferring, visual prompts and aids, and peer support in order to effectively engage in the Leader in Me process. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Pre-K - 5 Year long Pre-K-5 Year long Pre-K-5 Year long instructional team, special education team, administration instructional team, administration, instructional team, administration How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Our Parent Coordinator will facilitate workshops in September of 2017 in order to help communicate the vision for the Leader in Me throughout the building. These workshops will entail helping to define the 7 Habits, helping to reinforce the Habits in the home setting, and teach ways that parents can use the concepts of the 7 Habits in order to plan events, community outreach, and special projects within the building. Between November and March, our school 2018-19 CEP 20  will have "Leadership Days" where our parent community will participate in events to showcase the talents and efforts of all school stakeholders. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Leader in Me staff development (September, Ongoing) Leader in Me resources (Leader in Me books, posters, student books, online access) Power Brain trainer and resources Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. An internal "Leader in Me" survey will be created and distributed to school staff in January in order to determine the tone and positive culture of the school. 75% of the responses will be favorable as per the survey. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Leader in Me survey, Staff Survey Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 21  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 1. Beginning in the fall of 2018, the teaching staff at PS 56 will engage in targeted, high quality professional development aligned to the Teacher's College Units of Study in all grades, K-5. Throughout the 2017-2018 school year, teachers were provided with professional development during the school day, during Monday professional development time, and during full day professional development to improve the level of instructional taking place in reading and writing. Within these sessions, the teachers planned instruction together in either horizontal grade teams or vertical teams, adjusted the instruction based on student data, viewed model lesson facilitated by the instructional coach, co-taught and provided feedback to each other, and debriefed based on the observations of practice. As a result of this work: - According to the 2017-2018 School Quality Guide survey in the area of "Collaborative Teachers", in the Framework section there was an increase from 1.96 in 2017 to 3.08 in 2018 and in the Survey Element section, there was an increase from 1.91 in 2017 to 2.66 in 2018. - According to the 2017-2018 Quality Review report, PS 56 achieved a rating of "Proficient" in the area 4.2 Teacher Teams and Leadership Development, with the review stating "Teachers' collaboration on upper and lower grade level teams have strengthened their instructional capacity. Teacher have a voice in key decision that affect student learning, such as piloting different programs. 2. The priority needs that will be addressed in the goal is to strengthen the level of pedagogical understanding and the collaborative process of teachers teaching and learning best practices from each other on a consistent basis across the grades and throughout the school. According to our 2017-2018 Quality Review: - Teaching practices are beginning to reflect a set belief that students learn best when they engage in conversation, discourse and collaboration with their peers and teachers. - Additionally, there is evidence of "uneven levels of student thinking and participation" across the schools. Our goal is to ensure consistency of the high level work products and thinking in every classroom of the school. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified 2018-19 CEP 22  priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June of 2019, the Survey Element Score, as per the 2018-2019 School Quality Guide in the area of "Collaborative Teachers" will increase by 5 tenths to achieve a minimum score of at least 3.10, up from 2.66 in the spring of 2018. 2018-19 CEP 23  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? - Planning teams will meet on a bi-monthly basis to plan and prepare units of study, modify instruction, and look deeply at student data patterns and trends. Pre-K -5 teachers September 2018 - June 2019 Instructional Leadership Team, classroom teachers - Teachers will collaborate with administration to discuss and reflect on professional development cycles and the yearly professional development calendar. Pre-K-5 - Collaborations with the North Brooklyn Field Support Center (FSC) District and Central Offices to provide targeted professional development with teacher teams. Pre-K-5 - Team Meetings (School Assessment Team, School Implementation Team) will meet regularly on a monthly basis in order to discuss progress of students with disabilities and English Language Learners, using meeting protocols, to discuss instructional next steps and the students' Individualized Educational Plan. Pre- K-5 September 2018 - June 2019 Instructional Leadership Team, classroom teachers September 2018-June 2019 Instructional Leadership Team, classroom teachers September 2018 - June 2019 Instructional Leadership Team, Classroom Teachers 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. - Teachers will complete and send monthly newsletters in order to communicate instructional targets for each class and ways to support the learning at home. 2018-19 CEP 24  - Parent Workshops will be provided for families through Curriculum Night, during Tuesday Parent Engagement time, and during selected evening dates in order to inform parents on the curriculum and ways to work with children at home to support their class work. - Student led conferences will be implemented in order to ensure that student have a voice in reflecting on their progress and to help inform parents as to their progress and next steps. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. - Funds will be used to cover Per Diem for staff members attending workshops and profession development. - Staff developers hired to support teacher development. - Teachers College Reading and Writing instructional material including curriculum, professional books, Units of Study, etc. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February of 2019, a minimum of 10 professional development sessions will be facilitated by the teaching staff in a collaborative fashion, with teacher teams actively participating in the planning and preparation of units and lesson, utilizing protocols to look at student work products to inform instruction, and reassessing professional development calendar's for the year for targeted professional development based on their instructional needs. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Danielson Framework for Teaching, iReady Diagnostic Assessment, Teachers College Running Records, ECAM Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 25  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 1. According to the 2017-2018 School Quality Guide survey, there was an increase in the Survey and Framework Element Scores from 2.92 in 2017 to 3.16 in 2018. Additionally, as per the survey, "Ninety nine percent of parents/guardians agreed or strongly agreed that the principal/school leader at their school works hard to build trusting relationships with parents/guardians like them." Finally, according to the 2018 Quality Review Report, "The school leader and staff consistently communicate student progress and expectations connect to a path to college and career readiness. Staff member utilize different online platforms to communicate with families. Parents came to a quick consensus that they receive consistent information regarding their children's progress towards expectations. 2. The priority need that will be addressed is to ensure that teachers feel supported within the school and are a part of a shared decision making culture within the school building. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. According to the 2019 School Survey Report, there will be an increase in the Survey Element Score for "Effective School Leadership" from 2.47 to at a minimum 3.0 according to the 2018-2019 School Quality Guide. 2018-19 CEP 26  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? The instructional Leadership Team at PS 56 will meet bi-monthly in order to plan instruction, look at student data, and reflect on school wide instructional decisions that have impacted students learning. All students (Grades K-5) September 2018 2019 instructional team, administration, School Leadership Team, PTO, teachers Action plans will be created in order to improve student outcomes and decision will be modified from meeting to meeting based on the data. Pre-K- 5 September 2018-2019 Instructional Team, Administration The School implementation Team will meet regularly in order to look at performance data of students with special needs and English language learners in order to support their growth and development over the course of the school year. The instructional team, in conjunction with the IEP team, school psychologist, SETTS teacher, school counselor, and others will participate in selected planning meetings in order to provide input as to student progress and specific techniques and practices to support their learn. September 2018-2019 Instructional Team, Administration September 2018-2019 Instructional Team, Administration Students with Individual Education Plans, English language learners Students with Individual Education Plans, English language learners 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. During the fall of 2018, we will run a series of workshops about the institutional focus and curriculum of the school. The School Leadership Team will work with the parent members on ways they can help communicate the work with the greater parent community. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 2018-19 CEP 27  Fundations Reading Program, Teachers College Writing Units, Per Diem Substitutes for teacher coverage to facilitate common planning and professional development, consultants, Brooklyn North Borough Support Professional Development Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February of 2019, at least 10 meetings will be held by the Instructional Leadership Team in order to support the development of a shared decision making process. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. iReady Diagnostic Assessments (Reading and Math), Teachers College Running Records, Performance Tasks Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 28  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 1. In the 2018 NYC DOE School Survey, the Survey Element Scores in the area of "Strong Family Community Ties" indicates a score of 3.90, which was an increase from 3.50 the previous year. Additionally, 98% of families say that they are likely to go to a regularly scheduled parent-teacher conference with their child's teacher, while 95% of families say that the principal at their school promotes family and community involvement in the school. 2. Our priority needs is to continue to develop a diverse and inclusive school environment for all children that strongly promotes parent involvement and contributions from various stakeholders in the building. PS 56 is expanding program, such as our Gifted and Talented programs, as well as our World Language Spanish program, which are helping to bring in many different types of families into the building with diverse backgrounds, socioeconomic standings, and cultures. As a result, as a school community we have to be sensitive to the diverse needs of the children and families and create a culture that is sensitive and inclusive of everyone. As a result of this effort, we have increased our student population from 203 at the end of the 2016-2017 school year, to 218 at the end of the 2017-2018 school year, with an expected increase of student enrollment at the start of the 2018-2019 school year by approximately 40 students. This increase is the result of higher levels of communication with the greater community about the progress of the school, more school tours bringing in families on a weekly basis since the start of November, and increased programming and partnerships which attracts a wide range of families. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June of 2019, based on the NYC Learning Environment Survey, there will be an increase in the student enrollment figures to reflect at least 250 students enrolled in PS 56, and increase of at least 30 students from the previous school year. 2018-19 CEP 29  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? -Through implementation of the Leader in Me process, our school will facilitate at least 2 Leader in me Leadership Days, inviting parents and community members into the school to participate in the event. Students, parents September - June administrator, teachers and parent coordinator - Workshops/Meetings on diversity and equity. - Recruitment efforts will be supported by the PTA and SLT. Students and parents September-June - School website will be retooled to further promote the school and programs. Students and parents September-June Administration, teachers, Parent Coordinator Administration, teachers, Parent Coordinator - Parent learning opportunities will be planned and facilitated. ELL and SPED workshops will be provided to parents demonstrating ways that the school is helping students with special needs and language needs. Students and parents September-June Parent Coordinator, parents, selected staff 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. - Little Orchestra Society -Studio in a School - Appleseed - Ballroom Dancing - Kids Orbit Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment 2018-19 CEP 30  Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Leader in Me website, Leader in Me resources, Staff Developers, School Counselor, Instructional Team Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February of 2019, there will be an increase in the student enrollment by 25 students from 218 at the end of the 2017-2018 school year. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Parent Survey Results, Attendance Data Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 31  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Mathematics Science Social Studies At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) state / city assessments teacher referrals, Fundationsassessments, iReadyscores, conference notes, in class assessments state/city assessments, teacher referrals, periodic assessments, ireadyscores, conference notes, in class assessments state/city assessments, teacher referrals, conference notes, in class assessments teacher referrals, conference notes, in class assessments state exams, school wideassessments, behavior referrals, teacher observations. Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) independent reading, guided reading, interactive writing Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) small group, whole class, individualized instruction When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) before and after school School day-SETTS guided groups, math tasks small group, whole class, individualized instruction before and after school school day- SETTS whole class instruction, small group instruction, research based projects whole class instruction, small group instruction, research based projects responseto intervention, Leader in Me smallgroup, whole class, individualized instruction during school, after school small group, whole class, individualizedinstruction during school, after school small group, individualized instruction during school, after school 2018-19 CEP 32  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 25 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population.  Mentoring  Counseling Support    Books for additional reading/summer reading School Clubs School Supplies Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). n/a 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 CEP 33  n/a 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. n/a 2018-19 CEP 34  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. As our school motto states, PS 56 is a "Community of Learners, a Community of Leaders." As a result, our teaching staff participates in high quality professional development on a consistent basis in order to improve outcomes, motivate staff members, and retain highly qualified teachers. During the 2017-2018 school year, teachers were a part of the Teachers College Reading and Writing project. We received 20 on site visits from an instructional coach as well as 25 tickets for various teachers to participate in workshops at Columbia University. Additionally, we have had a cycle of professional development through a consultant on the "Pyramid of Inquiry" to promote more high level questions and discussion throughout the school. We also partnered with the FSC Brooklyn North to provide professional development to the staff in a variety of areas, including 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). Beginning in the fall of 2017, our school was a "Project School" of the Teachers College Reading and Writing Project of Columbia University. Through this partnership, our teachers received professional development in the areas of reading and writing in order to effectively implement the units of study throughout the year. in 2018-2019, we are partnering with General Ready. This professional development will entail consistent visits every month by our staff developer/coach. Additionally, the teachers attending workshops will be responsible for turn keying their learning to the other staff that have not attended workshops themselves. During the coach visits, our teachers will be made available to attend extended planning sessions, see model lessons by the coach, and they will facilitate lessons together with the teacher team in order to see and experience high quality lessons. Additionally, they will be provided with immediate feedback by the coaches to drive future instruction. Over the course of the year, the teachers will then look at student data to determine the effectiveness of the efforts and make adjustments to ensure positive outcomes at the end of the year. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. 2018-19 CEP 35  n/a 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). n/a Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). We utilize a number of strategies to assist preschool children from early childhood to elementary programs. First, we provide tours of our school for pre-kindergarten families throughout the year to help them become familiar with the school, expectations, and the staff. Our pre-kindergarten teachers are included in the school wide professional development so they are aware of instructional shifts and expectations of kindergarten to help them better prepare for their progress to the upper grades. Our pre-kindergarten and kindergarten teachers meet regularly throughout the year to look at data and student work and to collaborate on instructional next steps. Pre-kindergarten teachers also work with our school assessment team in order to determine possible special education needs to better serve all the students as they move from grade to grade. 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. Our school staff work together during weekly staff meetings to discuss assessment process that will help them determine student progress and provide valuable information for teachers and school staff. This information will be used to inform instruction and ensure that all students have the ability to meet grade level standards. We utilize research based programs, such as Fundations and Great Leaps in order to ensure that through the data and assessments, we are providing interventions to help all students achieve at a high level. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. 2018-19 CEP 36  Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local $131,231 $107,136 0 0 $1,452,432 x x x Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Column B Section Reference(s) 5a, 5b, 5e 5, 6 5c, 5d, 6 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH). 2018-19 CEP 37   Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 CEP 38  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. 13K056, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. [P.S.56] will support parents and families of Title I students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; 2018-19 CEP 39  ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; The school’s Parent Involvement Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in 2018-19 CEP 40  the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) School-Parent Compact (SPC) 13K056, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for 2018-19 CEP 41  improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; 2018-19 CEP 42  ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities 2018-19 CEP 43  ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; 2018-19 CEP 44  ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 2018-19 CEP 45  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 13 School Name Lewis H. Latimer Borough Brooklyn School Number 056 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Eric Grande Coach none ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher none here Teacher/Subject Area Natalie Johnson, Science Teacher/Subject Area none Related-Service Provider Joan Hochman Superintendent Barbara Freeman Assistant Principal none Coach none School Counselor none Parent type here Parent Coordinator Marvin Williams Field Support Center Staff Member Camila Holmes Other (Name and Title) type here C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 0 0 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 206 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] Total number of ELLs 0 0 8 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 3.88% 2018-19 CEP 46  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 1 2 K 0 0 0 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 0 4 0 0 0 3 0 0 0 5 0 0 0 6 0 0 0 7 0 0 0 8 0 0 0 9 0 0 0 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? We regularly use TCRWP and computer designed programs: Fountas and Pinnell, TCRWP, Great Leaps, and I-Ready. The insight that the data provides is very similar to the data provided by the NYSESLAT Modality Report from ATS. It helps us determine reading levels in order to guide student groupings and short/long term goals for each student. We use assessment to inform instruction in guided reading groups, reading conferences, and small/whole group instruction. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? With support from our Teachers College staff developers, Borough Field Support, Metamorphosis Math, and other staff developers, our teachers work in grade level teams in order to look at assessment data in order to inform instructional decisions and lesson planning. Teacher teams meet regularly during monthly scheduled Teachers College Coach days, monthly team meetings during Tuesday professional work time, and Monday professional development days. 2018-19 CEP 47  3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? The success of the program for ELLs in the building is evaluated by looking at our on-going assessments, NYSESLAT results, periodic assessments, and anecdotal information. We are looking to see steady increases in proficiency levels from one year to the next and students become proficient in the English language. The success of the program for ELLs at PS 56 is also evaluated by the monitoring of student's NYSESLAT results, their movement from one proficiency level to other, and across the language modalities. We also monitor the progress of former ELLs to determine if they are functioning well in the general education setting and to determine if they need additional instructional support. We also look at the Annual Measurable Achievement Objectives (AMAO) tool in order determine progress and to adjust instruction and provide supports if needed. We seek every year to make adequate yearly progress by showing sufficient gains with our ELL population on state assessments if they are required to take the exam at the end of the school year. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? Once summative data is gathered, our teacher teams, along with the instructional cabinet, look at the assessment data and determine appropriate interventions, such as additional exposure to Fundations lessons, at risk Wilson Language support, after school interventions, and others. After a period of 6 to 8 weeks, we re-assess the students progress and determine next steps if necessary. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] Based on the NYSITELL and NYSESLAT scores as well as classroom assessment, teachers of ELLs identify students who will benefit from Tier I and Tier II instruction. ELLs in grades K-2 identified as needing Tier II interventions receive Fundations, Wilson Reading supports, increased conferring in classrooms, and supports from . In general education classes, all ELLs receive Fundations. Students in 3-5, who have been identified as needing Tier I or Tier II interventions, receive small group instruction during afterschool and class periods. These students receive support using our research based interventions in order to target specific instructional areas of need, such as fluency, word attack skills, phonics, and/or comprehension. The programs we utilize are Great Leaps reading/math, Wilson, and I-Ready diagnostic to assess and determine specific skills and areas of need. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. The NYSESLAT data shows that ELLs are making progress on the assessment by moving to the next proficiency level. PS 56 has consistently increased or maintained the pass rate based on student demographics on the NYSESLAT from previous years. ELLs are making steady gains on the assessment by moving from one to the next proficiency level in order to become language proficient. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? Through weekly staff newsletters, during Monday professional development, and/or Tuesday team meetings, school leaders share their findings through the gathering of assessment data. Part IV: ELL Programming 2018-19 CEP 48  Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. All students in the Freestanding ENL program will be placed heterogeneously in one class for each grade level K-5. For example, all kindergarten students whose parents have opted for Freestanding ENL will be placed in the same kindergarten class. Entering, emerging, and transitioning students will receive both stand-alone ENL and integrated ENL. These students will receive integrated ENL four class periods per week, which will be co-taught by a certified ESOL teacher and a certified K-6 elementary school teacher. Further, entering students will be pulled-out for stand-alone ENL for 180 minutes per week, and emerging students will be pulled-out for stand-alone ENL 90 minutes per week. Expanding and commanding students will receive four periods of integrated ENL per week to further support their language development. b. TBE program. If applicable. There is no TBE program in the school. c. DL program. If applicable. There is no DL program in the school. 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? ENL/ELA will be achieved through stand-alone and integrated ENL. All students will receive 180 minutes of ENL through whole group instruction. Entering and emerging students will receive an additional 180 minutes of stand-alone ENL, which will be done through small group instruction, which will total 360 minutes of ENL/ELA instruction. All students in the TBE program will receive one unit of home language arts, which will be delivered through whole group instruction. In addition, students entering and emerging in the bilingual program will receive math and science in their native language, and students expanding and commanding will only receive science in their native language. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? We currently use the Spanish LAB to determine native language proficiency in Spanish. We also use informal assessments to monitor progress throughout the year. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status 2018-19 CEP 49  ELL population consists of many subgroups, and they all require differentiated instruction: a) Plan for SIFE: There is no SIFE population in our school. If there was there is a need to: • Provide academic intervention services as an extension of the regular school program on both push in and pull out services. • Making an individualized student needs assessment. • Differentiation of instruction in all areas. • Grade appropriate instructional support materials. • Communicate closely with the parents to monitor their children’s progress. Once SIFE students are identified, PS 56 would be monitoring the progress of those students and their scores on the NYSESLAT, ELA and Math assessments, and provide support in all content areas to differentiate instruction for literacy needs. The Unison school would make available all existing support structures such as ESL, Extended Day or Speech which could benefit the student. b) Plan for Newcomers: When a new student is registered in our school, we provide the following resources to facilitate the transition: • Buddy system identifying a similar student in his/her class that will assist during the day. Finding a student who speaks the same language as ELL who can help him/her in the classroom. • An informal student orientation. • Encourage student to participate in After School activities and to involve the students in schools celebrations and other programs. • An informal assessment is provided to identify possible Academic Intervention programs. • Home school communication is an important factor for our newcomers. In our program the newcomers who have been in the US schools for less than three years are provided with a variety of strategies and materials are used to aid their instruction: scaffolding, picture dictionaries, photo cards, manipulatives. In addition to the support received in ESL class, those students are required to participate in Small Group Instruction. They are provided with the support that prepares them to participate in NYS assessments (e.g. ELA, Math, Science, Social Studies). Students work in small groups with their classroom teachers targeting specific areas of need. In addition, word to word dictionaries and glossaries are in place to support them during the tests as well as translated tests editions may be available. c) Plan for ELLs receiving service 4 to 6 years. For the students who 4-6 and Long-Term students, Extension of ESL services is requested. Same support structures as above are provided. d) Plan for Long Term ELLs: Long terms ELLs are the large number of Ells across the grades. An analysis of their scores on the NYSESLAT, ELA and Math assessments suggests that their problem is one of reading and writing. Our action plan for this group involves: • Monitoring the progress of students in all content areas to differentiate instruction for literacy needs. • Encourage their participation in the school’s programs to enrich their language and academic skills. • Communicate closely with the parents to monitor their children’s progress. Plan for Special Needs Students: • Collaboration between the ESL teacher and IEP contact person, school psychologist and school intervention team. • Monitoring newcomer and SIFE student for possible special needs status. 2018-19 CEP 50  • Ensure that teachers of students with an IEP are familiar with students' particular needs and all services are provided accordingly to the IEP mandates. • Communicate closely with the parents to monitor their children’s progress. As a policy for special needs students we ensure that teachers of students with an IEP are familiar with students’ particular needs and all services are provided accordingly to the IEP mandates. PS 56 school students with special needs are integrated in the mainstream ESL program and put under the supervision of the teacher and school Health Coordinator. Based on the individual, ESL strategies and instructional methods are utilized. e) Students who passed the NYSESLAT are integrated into our standard educational models. They are eligible for two years after testing out from NYSESLAT to receive testing accommodation that also apply for other ELLs and they can receive additional support as needed. After reaching proficiency on the NYSESLAT, post-ELL students will continue to receive language acquisition support to consolidate and further develop their English language skills. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? ELL-SWDs are taught using grade-appropriate curriculum, Superkids, Teacher's College units, Ready Gen and Go! Math. Teachers use a number of instructional strategies to provide access to academic content and English language development such as focused weekly goals, Total Physical Response, direct vocabulary instruction, small-group instruction, bilingual scaffolds, written and visual scaffolds. Teachers also provide additional curriculum support through programs such as Fundations, and iReady. Teachers of ELL-SWDs have an increased number of personnel in the classroom to assist with providing extra support to include para-professionals and student teachers. Additionally, some ELL-SWDS receive support via the SETTS coordinator using the Wilson Foundations. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? Targeted intervention programs in our school for ELLs in Math, ELA and other content areas are SETTS, ESL, Reading Recovery Program, Math intervention, Occupational Therapy, Guidance Counselor, Physical Therapy and Speech. The language of instruction is English. The translators over the phone or our bilingual paras are used for translations if necessary. IEP evaluations and parent teachers meetings are conducted for our students with special needs. Apart from ENL program and other intervention programs the classroom teachers are concerned with the language needs of ELLs, constantly monitor students’ understanding of linguistically challenging material and use a variety of phrasings and synonyms to clarify meaning, and scaffold the instruction with visual aids such as maps, and illustrations to increase comprehension. We use Guided reading, and vocabulary quizzes to make instruction more involving and effective. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. Targeted interventions for ELLs in ELA in the content areas include: Wilson Foundations, Fountas and Pinnell Lessons, and ESL Brainpop. Based on multiple assessments, Response to Intervention Services (RTI) are provided to students who show a need for support in ELA and the content areas. Next year, we anticipate ENL teachers pushing-in not only during ELA instruction, but also during Math and Science instruction. These services will continue for two years after ELLs exit the program. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? This year our ENL class is equipped with the Smart board. There were also some books, dictionaries and language games bought for ENL classroom. Students have also access to two laptops to differentiate the instruction. The program move-to 2018-19 CEP 51  improve will be implemented this year with our ELL. Furthermore, new ELA and Math programs that are aligned to the Common Core will be used with our ENL students. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? We will not discontinue any programs because we find them beneficial. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. ELLs at PS 56 have equal access to all after school programs and supplemental services offered in our building. They are available to all parents and students in the school – guidance counselor, family worker, parent coordinator, speech and language therapist, social worker, and psychologist. Students take part in the community building activities. In order to support learning and foster community involvement, we use a portion of our funding to create supplementary programs for ELLs and their families and these include: Family Celebrations: Throughout the year, parents come to the school to take part in community celebrations and the school wide events, parents’ workshop and volunteering including the Monthly Spirit Days, school wide events, parents' workshops and volunteering. At these events, the school and community can come together to recognize student achievements in arts and academics. Furthermore, school is organizing many school trips where parents often participate. Translation and Interpretation Services: These services are offered to increase the involvement of parents in the TBE program, additional funding is available to translate important policy documents, mainly in Spanish. Additionally, interpretation services are a daily help in communication between school staff and parents. Bilingual paras are available to help to communicate with students and parents. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. The Freestanding ENL program does not use a particular text to meet the demands of Common Core learning standards. This includes the use of high interest / low level texts and leveled library. Students are provided with books, tapes and assisted technology to promote student achievement and success. The ENL classroom has the library level books and magazines, high interests books, content areas books for Math, ELA, social studies and science, bilingual books, large print books, dictionaries and poems, math and language games and activities and the cd player for listening to songs and stories that are used daily by the teacher and the students. We have text books and supplementary reading materials in native languages, use content-area videos for students with limited English reading levels, and provide simplified language materials with visual components for our ELL students. Newcomer/beginner ELLs are provided access to native-language translations of key texts and independent reading material (when available). Electronic translation is provided when appropriate (e.g. online translators like Google). Translating dictionaries are provided for student use during content-area classes. The ENL teacher also uses technology to support ELLs in the classroom. The ENL teacher also uses computers, laptops, smartboard, cd player with radio, ipads and technology lab, so students can use programs that help them with phonics, vocabulary, reading, writing, and math. In addition, the internet resources are used to practice math, ELA and other content areas. The Wilson program is used for learning foundations in writing, spelling and phonics. The Leap Frog computers are also used to develop the students’ vocabulary and the reading comprehension, as well as phonics and pronunciation. Also content area materials are used in the classroom: chapter books, social studies books, science books, and ELA and Math content area books. The Picture dictionaries, Weber dictionaries as well as Bilingual dictionaries are also frequently used in the 2018-19 CEP 52  ESL instruction. Native language materials are used to support ELLs. Books in different languages and the bilingual picture dictionaries are available to support instruction. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Newcomer/beginner ELLs are provided with native-language support when appropriate. This includes verbal and written translation and explanation of key texts, access to translation dictionaries, and use of electronic translation resources, such as online translating software. In PS 56 there is native language support in ENL class. Students are allowed to use their native language with the teacher and/or peer to express understanding or ask for clarification. Books in the different languages, Weber dictionaries, picture dictionaries and bilingual dictionaries are available to support instruction as well as for the students to take home. As a testing accommodation, the bilingual glossaries may be provided when taking all state examinations and also the Department of Education may provide them with translated editions of some tests. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. The required services support, and resources correspond to ELL’s ages and grade levels. The services provide support needed by ENL students to archive and maintain a satisfactory level of academic performance. ELL acquire and develop English language skills while meeting their grade and age level standards in core subjects. ELL students are assessed on an ongoing basis with the help of periodic assessments. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? The Freestanding ENL program does not use a particular text to meet the demands of Common Core learning standards. This includes the use of high interest / low level texts and leveled library. Students are provided with books, tapes and assisted technology to promote student achievement and success. The ENL classroom has the library level books and magazines, high interests books, content areas books for Math, ELA, social studies and science, bilingual books, large print books, dictionaries and poems, math and language games and activities and the cd player for listening to songs and stories that are used daily by the teacher and the students. We have text books and supplementary reading materials in native languages, use content-area videos for students with limited English reading levels, and provide simplified language materials with visual components for our ELL students. Newcomer/beginner ELLs are provided access to native-language translations of key texts and independent reading material (when available). Electronic translation is provided when appropriate (e.g. online translators like Google). Translating dictionaries are provided for student use during content-area classes. The ENL teacher also uses technology to support ELLs in the classroom. The ENL teacher also uses computers, laptops, smartboard, cd player with radio, ipads and technology lab, so students can use programs that help them with phonics, vocabulary, reading, writing, and math. In addition, the internet resources are used to practice math, ELA and other content areas. The Wilson program is used for learning foundations in writing, spelling and phonics. The Leap Frog computers are also used to develop the students’ vocabulary and the reading comprehension, as well as phonics and pronunciation. Also content area materials are used in the classroom: chapter books, social studies books, science books, and ELA and Math content area books. The Picture dictionaries, Weber dictionaries as well as Bilingual dictionaries are also frequently used in the ESL instruction. Native language materials are used to support ELLs. Books in different languages and the bilingual picture dictionaries are available to support instruction. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). We conduct home visits to the families of all newly enrolled students, including ELLs. At the beginning of the new school year , or when a newcomer is identified we conduct orientations with the parents as they enroll their children and after the child is identified as an eligible candidate for ENL instructional services. PS 56 conducts an orientation session to assist all the newly enrolled students. All the letters to parents are translated in their native languages. Our parents and students are invited to 2018-19 CEP 53  attend and participate. In addition, there are meetings with the parent coordinator, principal, the school secretary and other pedagogues to discuss the child’s placement, to gather necessary documentation before the enrollment and to conduct the oral interview with the parent. The over the phone translation is used if necessary and bilingual paras are also available. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? There are no language electives offered to any of our students, including ELLs. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? In our school we don't have dual language program. Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? Professional development at PS 56 is provided by school staff, community learning support personnel organization, all personnel who work with ELLs : subject area teachers, common branches teachers, paraprofessionals, ENL teacher, parent coordinator and other school personnel and it is a key component of the PS 56 . Study sessions are conducted on monthly basis. PS 56 provides also in-house Professional Development at the end of the school year and PD conferences during the school year. Our PD meetings involve Differentiated Instruction in Literacy, Writing workshops, Math and Content Areas, data analysis to inform instruction, technology sessions that instruct ENL and content area teachers how to use online resources to make instruction more comprehensible, and looking at standards in ELA, ENL, Math, Science and Social Studies and Common Core Standards. We will have professional development on conferring, differentiated instruction, small group instruction, meeting protocols, looking at student work, total physical response, scaffolding instruction, vocabulary instruction, among others. Special Ed Meetings are conducted every week. During the beginning of the school year transition concerns are talked about and interventions are planned. Later on during the school year, as each new student is admitted to the school, similar needs are addressed and implemented when appropriate. ENL teacher attends the state learning standards workshops in which there is a high impact on differentiated and academic language development strategies, large conferences, targeted workshops on assessments and strategies, grade meetings, study groups, faculty conferences and grade conferences. Also ELL teacher plans to attend a variety of off-site workshops to promote collaboration between content area and language teachers. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. Our staff at PS.56 including ESL teacher and a guidance counselor provide parents, and the students with information about different schools, helping make the proper placement of those ELL students who transfer from elementary school to middle school. 2018-19 CEP 54  All teachers in the school receive professional development which include support in ELL methodology, strategies and scaffolds as well as preparing ELLs for the Common Core Learning Standards. Also teachers who attend outside workshops specific to ELLs, turnkey information in an on-site training during the Monday professional development time to all teachers. These sessions meet the 15% of hours for all teachers in ELL specific professional development. Bilingual and ENL teachers receive specific professional development to include the above trainings via study groups, professional development from the department of ELLs, professional development from other institutions, conferences, and webinars. The combination of these learning experiences fulfills the 50% of total hours for ELL-specific professional development. In order to track this data, in school trainings keep an agenda and attendance record. Teachers are required to keep their agenda from all outside trainings to ensure attendance. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? Each year ENL and bilingual teachers hosts a parent information session. During this parent information session, parents are informed of the dates of the upcoming exams and gain familiarity with the four sections that their children will encounter on the upcoming exam. Parents are also invited every week to discuss their children's language development needs during Tuesdays parent outreach time. Additionally, parents receive newsletters, which outlines the goals for the school. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Our parent coordinator assists the ENL instructors with the compliance meetings for the parents of our ELL population. As previously noted, these take place at the beginning of the school year as well as throughout the year on a case by case basis. ELL families are invited to participate in regular meetings that happen Tuesday during parental involvement time. Invitations are sent in the parents native language. In addition, Learning Leaders is a group of parents that volunteer at our school, and they also help with translation during our meetings. Furthermore, parents are invited to participate in classroom activities as well as shows and performances we host in the building. All communication is sent home in the parents native language or translated to them over the phone. The parent association plays a key role in supporting the academic, social, and cultural areas that support the success of English Language Learners. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Paste response here: 2018-19 CEP 55  2018-19 CEP 56 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Eric Grande, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 CEP 57  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: School DBN: Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Eric Grande Title Principal Assistant Principal Marvin Williams Parent Coordinator ENL/Bilingual Teacher Parent Ruby Chantire Teacher/Subject Area Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach Derrell Keys School Counselor Barbara Freeman Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 2018-19 CEP 58  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 13k056 School Name: Lewis H. Latimer Superintendent: Mrs. B. Freeman The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No (*Primary) * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. Home Language Identification Surveys and parent teacher conferences are used to determine what tranlation services are needed. According to the HLIS, our students speak Arabic, Bengali, Spanish, and Urdu. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. 2018-19 CEP 59 Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Language Arabic, Bengali, Spanish, and Urdu. 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. At PS 56, we work to ensure that our parents of various native languages are provided with translated documents in order to have a clear understanding of school events, key information and student progress. Documents that are not available from the DOE website are translated by in-house school staff and/ or outside providers. All parents of English Language Learners receive documents at the beginning of each school year. We provide signs where parents can point to the language of their choice in order to call or make appointments so an interpreter can be available. All other parent communication is distributed to parents at the same time. We use software available on the internet, such as Google and Babel to translate documents for parents. Written translation is provided by school staff in needed languages. The Office of the Parent Coordinator holds a list of interpreters. Some of the documents we translate for parents include: letters, brochures, flyers, notices, handouts, forms, surveys, reference guides, and special calendars as soon 2018-19 CEP 60  as parents are identified as speakers of other languages. The ESL team, which includes the Principal, the ESL instructors, and the Parent Coordinator, determine and plan for interpreters. Interpreters from the translation units of the Department of Education are called as needed. The current language status of each family is maintained in the ATS system and our ELL compliance binder. The data is provided for parents in their program selection form and from the HLIS. All documents are sent home in native languages 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide interpretation service(s)? During the school year, we conduct a number of important meetings, events, and informational sessions to parents in order to provide them with key information and clear understanding of the education being provided to their children on a daily basis. We start the year with our ELL Parent Orientation meetings in September and October where we inform the parent community of the programs we have at PS 56 to support the English language learners in the building. Next, we provide a number of workshops, facilitated by our Parent Coordinator with translators, to inform the parents of our school programs, such as the Leader in Me, Studio in a School, Cookshop, Leap Programs such as arts and crafts and Zumba. We also hold our Parent/Teacher conferences 3 times during the school year and provide staff members to assist with translation when needed around the building. These meetings are held on a weekly basis either in the morning or the afternoon to accommodate 2018-19 CEP 61  different parent schedules. Our attendance teachers, family workers, and parent coordinator work closely together as a team to communicate to parents about their students' progress and needs in the school. These staff members are bilingual and can support the teachers in translating and effectively communicating to the parents. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) Our parent outreach team, consisting of the school administration, parent coordinator, family workers, and community assistants will work as a unit to ensure that we fulfill all obligations set forth by the Chancellor's Regulations A-663. As a team, we will together review the requirement and make necessary adjustments if needed to ensure we meet all four of these items in the checklist. We will meet on a bi-monthly basis to oversee the status of these items and revise our plan as needed. We will use the A-633 as a guide to monitor our progress over the course of the year. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? We will utilize key staff, such as our Parent Coordinator, and Family Workers in order to gather information from parents as to how effectively we provide access to our school data through interpretation and translation. We will 2018-19 CEP 62  also look at survey data to help us determine the needs of the parents and school community. Finally, we will analyze attendance data from our events and workshops to determine if we are effectively raising attendance levels at the various programs we offer. 2018-19 CEP 63 
