2018-19 COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (CEP-CS) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 14K059 School Name: P.S. 059 WILLIAM FLOYD Principal: CHERRY ANN HISLOP 2018-19 CEP-CS 1  Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 CEP 2  School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information PS 59 William Floyd 331400010059 PK -5 School Number (DBN): 14k059 211 Throop Ave. Brooklyn, NY 11206 718-486-2200 718-486-2205 Phone Number: Lisa Johnson Fax: Email Address: Ljohnson53@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Cherry-Ann Joseph-Hislop Karen Rost Julio Irizarry AimeFerdinand NilsaTorres n/a n/a PiaKobalSnoj District Information Geographical District: 14 Superintendent’s Office Address: Alicja Winnicki Superintendent: 75 Heyward Street Room 246 Brooklyn N.Y. 11206 awinnic@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: (718) 302-7600 Phone Number: (718) 302-7978 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) 2018-19 CEP 3  Brooklyn North Bernadette Fitzgerald FSC: Executive Director’s Office Address: Executive Director: 131 Livingston St. Brooklyn, N.Y. 11201 Bfitzge2@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: (718) 935 - 3954 Phone Number: (718) 935-3362 Fax: 2018-19 CEP 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Cherry-Ann Joseph-Hislop Karen Rost Julio Irizarry JaneeAlston Cynthia Washington Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Teacher/ Early Childhood Parent/Early Childhood Para-professional/Special Needs 2018-19 CEP 5  Monique Sirmans Natasha Godley LoulaDeshommes MarcelleSealy Corey Brooks Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Guidance/Upper Elementary Parent/Upper Elementary Parent /Special Needs Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ 2018-19 CEP 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with 2018-19 CEP 7  the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement 2018-19 CEP 8  Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? P.S 59 is committed to creating a legacy of academic excellence for every student. We seek to develop individuals who cannot merely be defined by standards, but can set them as well. Our goal is for each student's social and intellectual growth to be exceeded only by their humanity. We instill in them the knowledge that we are interdependent members of the global community and have an obligation to make a contribution of substance. We show evidence of this commitment through our valued partnerships with parents and community-based organizations. We model this commitment by making this a place where teaching and learning is honored every day. 2018-19 CEP 9  2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. Our school community believes that technology integration is valuable for many reasons. Primarily, we see it as a staple in the lives of our students who are digital natives, having grown up with technology. Our students are all technologically savvy as consumers, but have no idea of their potential power as innovators and creators of the next generation of technology. We know that as many of our students struggle academically, they all thrive in the virtual worlds that technology brings to them daily, both within and outside of the school walls. We understand the importance of integrating a known passion as the key to unlocking other academic potential. Additionally we have partnered with Disney to provide our artistic students with more of the Arts, and we have implemented technological devices in every classroom for students to learn with technology and build their technological skills. We are also a UFT Community School and a recipient of the 21st Century grant, which allow us to provide additional enrichment and academic services for our students, as well as additional programming for our parents and families. A major part of this collaboration is a robust afterschool program coordinated by The Leadership Program and school staff that offers exciting activities, academic support, and a hot supper five days per week to many of our students. In addition, we host an on site dental clinic, we provide referrals to partner programs for mental health services through the Puerto Rican Family Institute, and we offer a variety of parent workshops throughout the year. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. P. S. 59 William Floyd School for Professional Studies is a community school which has serviced generations of families since it was built in 1955. Our students predominantly reside in the housing developments which surround our school. Our faculty is a reflection of our city, some young, some more mature, and a melting pot of cultures and backgrounds. Our students are also diverse, because within the nearly fifty percent split of African American and Hispanic students, we have students whose lineage includes countries like Senegal, Ethiopia, the West Indies, Pakistan, Columbia, Puerto Rico and the Dominican Republic. We foster a belief in children that is evident in our extracurricular offerings as well as our academic programs; all are aligned to the Framework for Great Schools and focuses on building a supportive environment. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. Our school strengths also include innovative programs to foster college and career readiness like our Rites of Passage program. In this program our grade 5 students learn a number of skills and lessons to prepare them for their transition into adolescence, middle school education and beyond. In addition, our students in all grades participate in our “I Have A Dream” series where students identify the profession that interests them and professionals come and provide seminars to those students on the profession they selected. Our school counts our ability to adapt our curricula to the diverse needs of our students in alignment to the Framework for Great Schools focus on rigorous curriculum. We have also been able to make growth according N.Y.S.E.D. in our previous testing year. One of our greatest accomplishments is our success at greatly reducing student incidents and creating an inclusive and supportive environment for students and staff. This also aligns to the Framework for Great Schools focus on supportive environment. Perhaps our most significant challenge is maintaining our level of student services despite changes in resources. Our school has made the most significant growth in tenet 4.5, our use of data and instructional practice to enhance student learning. In accordance with the Framework for Great Schools, our teachers are strong in collaboration. They work tirelessly to develop and train in protocols to improve their ability to assess student work, interpret student data and adjust instructional practice to address the needs delineated in that data. We have also looked more deeply at the types of assessments used to ensure that they are better aligned to the outcomes desired for student proficiency. We also have made gains in tenet 3.4, improving teacher collaboration by moving beyond common preps to 2018-19 CEP 10  developing an empowered instructional cabinet, developing teacher leaders, and cultivating teacher development through the use of instructional rounds, inquiry teams, and peer coaching. Finally, we have made gains in tenet 2.3, systems and structures for school development through creating teams to create student social development programs, protocols for assessment and data accountability, and R.T.I. structures to support student subgroups and under-served populations. This year we will continue work on tenet three to hone curriculum to improve student outcomes. We will also work on tenet four to continue to hone instruction for improved student learning. 2018-19 CEP 11  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 14K059 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration PK,0K,01,02,03,04,05 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 312 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language YES Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 30 31 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 24 23 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 94.0% % Attendance Rate 92.9% % Reduced Lunch 9.3% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 1.9% 44.6% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 1.3% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 1.69 0% 0% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 28.7% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 73% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A YES N/A N/A YES Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A YES N/A N/A NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A NO High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 25 26 89.5% 1.0% 24.7% 51.0% 1.3% 1.9% 2 0% 6.5 32.1% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No YES N/A N/A N/A YES YES N/A N/A N/A NO N/A N/A N/A N/A NO N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 CEP 12  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. The greatest challenge that exists for our school is to increase the percentage of our students that meet grade level standards. To do so we must ensure that teacher curriculum planning, implementation, and evaluation remain rigorous and relevant to students' needs. As our school population changes, what was relevant or effective to one group may not be effective with another. What has helped us move from developing to effective in the areas of collaboration and curriculum is our emphasis on using assessments more effectively to plan not only instruction but intervention supports as well. This has become a school strength, but we must look deeper in this area if we are to effect greater growth. Student comprehension is an area of need. Student led conversation has helped to elevate student comprehension of text. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 100% of our teachers will engage in professional learning community teams resulting in increased shared professional learning so classrooms reflect the higher order thinking, student lead discussion, and multiple entry point tasks that provide for challenging and rigorous teaching and learning and an increase in student performanceas evidence by pre and post assessments, student portfolios, and other assessments. 2018-19 CEP 13  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Lower grade students far below grade level in reading will be targeted for additional Academic Intervention Services by teachers. These services will take place during the school day (paid for from the school budget) and during afterschool (paid for with per session from 21st Century). Lowest Third October to June Students will be involved in Reciprocal Teaching, Socratic Method Discourse, and Center – based learning opportunities Lead teachers will be trained in reciprocal teaching facilitation, Socratic discourse instruction, and data disaggregation for lesson adjustment. Teachers will meet collaboratively with Teacher leaders and Administrators for support weekly and bi weekly respectively. Progress will be monitored through learning walks, observations, and periodic data analysis to ensure this action plan is implemented. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement 9/2018-6/2019 9/2018-6/2019 Gen. Ed, Sp. Ed., Lowest Third, Highest students, Ells Lead teachers on each grade, classroom and Cluster teachers Administration, Classroom Teachers, Literacy Coach, CLS Director/Afterschool Director (to coordinate afterschool AIS) Administration, Lead Teachers, Classroom Teachers, Consultants Administration, Lead Teachers, Instructional Cabinet How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. The school will provide a monthly parent newsletter to parents highlighting academic programs and activities for the month. The parental involvement time on Tuesday is called "Parent Time at PS 59". Workshops for parents at monthly events will be targeted at academic and socio-emotional concepts. Every month starting in September parents will receive communication via Class Dojo and school messenger. The principal will also host a Sip and Chat every Friday morning while seeking to maintain an open door policy to all parents. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 2018-19 CEP 14  Teachers, paraprofessionals, Parent Coordinator, Administration, Consultants, Guidance Counselors, Ready Gen, Go Math!, ReadWorks, Johnny Can Spell Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A X C4E X 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By November 2018 and March 2019, 50% of our students will be reading on grade level. All students who are not will be receiving academic intervention during and after school. We will review November and March Teacher's College Benchmark reading levels to see if we are on track to meet our goal. Teachers will identify the percentage of students that are on track, above and below grade level and use the data to drive instruction with differentiated lessons, small groupings, and other interventions. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) Teacher's College Benchmark Reading levels and Marking Period Assessment Guide. Teachers will upload data into Assessment Pro system and monitor the benchmarks of each student. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 15  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? OORS data from the 2017-2018 school year show the vast majority of disciplinary incidents in the school are violations of discipline code A24 - "Shoving, pushing, or engaging in a minor altercation or similar physical confrontational behavior towards students or school personnel, or throwing an object or spitting at another person." This shows an ongoing need for social emotional learning and community building, despite high school environment scores on recent school surveys. Our school worked with Sanford Harmony to support and augment the school's goals in the areas of social and emotional learning. Our partnership with the Department of Health has supported students’ needs for dental care in a venue that is projected to reduce student absenteeism and/ or lateness. In addition, our strength is evident here in our ability to utilize limited resources to develop stronger community ties while taking a holistic approach to meeting student needs. The work was facilitated by a new guidance position. To continue our work in the areas of social-emotional learning, our priority need is for teachers to be trained to provide daily instruction in social-emotional based learning based on the Sanford Harmony curriculum and the Morning Meeting framework. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 100% of our teachers will be trained to provide daily instruction in Social-emotional learning based on the Sanford Harmony curriculum and will host Morning Meetings using the curriculum on a daily basis. 2018-19 CEP 16  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Socio-emotional supports for at-risk students, coordinated approaches to program development and strategies to support ELL students. We will continue to incorporate Sanford Harmony to improve student metacognition and socio-emotional development. This will be monitored by learning walks and regular cycles of observations focused on a reduction of incidents in the building. STH, Lowest third, Ells, Sp. Ed, At- Risk, Economically Disadvantaged 9/2018-6/2019 Administration, Dean, Teachers, Paraprofessionals, Support Staff Students will be supported with daily advisory sessions during the first 10 minutes of each day. Teachers and staff will continue to receive training on Sanford Harmony and the architecture of a morning meeting. Teachers will also receive training on how to adapt strategies for subgroups in alignment with the research based Whole Child teaching approach. The adaptation will be differentiated to support Students in Temporary Housing (STH), our Lowest Third, ELLs, Special Education, At Risk an Economically disadvantaged students. This will be monitored by learning walks and regular cycles of observations. Partnership development with family support agencies and organizations (such as the Puerto Rican Family Institute) to support students and families of students with developmental learning delays and mental health needs. This will be monitored by parent surveys and teacher-parent outreach. These partnerships will be coupled with staff training on how teachers can identify and refer students and families with specific needs. Staff will also receive training on trauma informed practices and stress reduction from the school's Mental Health Consultant. Develop partnerships with organizations which support physical and emotional health through student fitness initiatives (such as Move-to-Improve). This correlates to research that supports a link between fitness activities and heightened brain function. This process of integrating these strategies benefit, children, staff, and parents. The benefits of the process reinforce the care we have for every community member and reinforces community trust. STH, Lowest third, Ells, Sp. Ed, At- Risk, Economically Disadvantaged 9/2018-6/2019 Administration, Dean, SIT, CBO All parents, all students (as needed) 9/2018-6/2019 Administration, CLD, Mental Health Consultant, Dean, Teachers, Paraprofessionals, Support Staff STH, Lowest third, Ells, Sp. Ed, At- Risk, Economically Disadvantaged 9/2018-6/2019 Administration, Dean, Teachers, Paraprofessionals, Support Staff 2018-19 CEP 17  3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Parents will receive workshops during marquee parent events and parent engagement time on Tuesdays that are targeted to supporting their children at home academically, socially, and emotionally. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Sanford Harmony kits, PTA, Title I Committee, Parent Advisory Committee, Parent Coordinator, Guidance Counselors, Administration, Teachers, Paras, CBOs, schedule adjustments for lab sites and grade wide assemblies. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 100% of teachers will be trained on the Sanford Harmony curriculum. By June 100% of teachers will show evidence of the use of the Sanford Harmony curriculum in their Morning Meetings as observed by administration. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Observations by administration, classroom removals and suspensions as evidenced by OORS reports Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 18  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. The staff has worked with a school wide inquiry protocol for the past three years looking at student work and identifying the academic strengths and weaknesses of students in each class. Teachers worked collaboratively every week in two inquiry teams--Grades K-2 and Grades 3-5--to surface academic gaps. There is still a need for additional teacher collaboration on targeted instructional strategies that are created to address academic deficits revealed in the inquiry meetings. This need is reflected in 2018 June instructional reports, which show lingering academic deficiencies in specific standards compared to citywide performance, despite overall progress in closing the gap between school and citywide performance in ELA and math scores in most grades. In addition, teacher needs surveys, administration observations, and the professional development committee have strongly suggested the need for development around differentiation and coteaching models. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June, 100% of our teachers will have presented student work and worked collaboratively with colleagues to craft instructional strategies to address next steps and academic gaps surfaced inquiry team meetings. 100% of teachers will participate in a six week professional development cycle to grow knowledge around differentiation. 100% of ICT teachers will participate in a six week professional development cycle to grow knowledge around coteaching models. 2018-19 CEP 19  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs,  professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Inquiry teams will meet once per week to look at student work and discuss instructional strategies to address the surfacing academic gaps. The qualitative data from these inquiry team meetings will be used to determine student areas of need and strength. Teachers will collaborate on how this will inform intervention groups. Students are assessed weekly and intervention time is scheduled three days a week where skills from the previous week are re-taught and reinforced. Students in grades 3-5 will also be offered after school support in preparation for state assessments. Students will also receive assessments in a variety of ways including via computer and student response modules on SmartBoards. A six week professional development cycle will be crafted to address best practices in differentiation and Universal Design for Learning strategies. A six week professional development cycle will be crafted to address research based coteaching models. Teachers will collaborate to create seminars for parents to inform and educate parents on the expectations of the Common Core and how they are presented in standardized assessments. Parents will also be welcomed to curriculum night and other classroom shared learning experiences with their children to afford parents the opportunity to experience the assessments first hand. STH, Lowest third, Ells, Sp. Ed, At- Risk, Economically Disadvantaged, Staff STH, Lowest third, Ells, Sp. Ed, At- Risk, Economically Disadvantaged, Parents, Staff 9/2018-6/2019 Administration, Dean, Teachers, Paraprofessionals, Support Staff 9/2018-6/2019 Administration, Dean, Teachers, Paraprofessionals, Support Staff All teachers and paraprofessionals November/December Administration, teacher leaders All ICT teachers October/November Administration, teacher leaders Parents 9/2018-6/2019 Administration, Dean, Teachers, Paraprofessionals, Support Staff 2018-19 CEP 20 The focus on effective assessment structures and protocols will result in more rigorous instruction, greater student engagement and better student performance. These elements are core to the capacity framework’s overarching element of trust. Teachers will collaborate on fostering student trust in teachers, teacher trust in student capacity and parents’ trust in the communities commitment to meet student needs. STH, Lowest third, Ells, Sp. Ed, At- Risk, Economically Disadvantaged, Parents, Staff 9/2018-6/2019 Administration, Dean, Teachers, Paraprofessionals, Support Staff 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Teachers will offer parents the option of visiting the school during the weekly parental involvement time on Tuesdays. Teachers will host Family Fridays so parents can see effective instructional techniques in the children's classrooms. Parents will be welcomed to curriculum night and other classroom shared learning experiences with their children to afford parents the opportunity to experience the work taking place in the classroom around the standards. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Teachers, Consultants, and Administration, SmartBoards, tablets, laptops, computer desktops, testing materials, intervention materials, authentic literature, math manipulatives, science assessment materials, testing scheduling adjustments for student testing. 21st Century per session teacher funding will be used for afterschool academic support to provide time for teachers to fill academic gaps surfaced during the inquiry process. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy C4E X X Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Students will be tested weekly for intervention support using Common Core aligned test questions through a skill of the week quiz. This data will be used to group students for Specially Designed Instruction groups and intervention. By December students should show progress as evidenced by the comparison of baseline to interim assessments. By January of students will have taken two standardized assessments aligned tests to provide data to support student progress. By February of students will have taken three standardized assessment aligned tests to show evidence of student progress from the previous assessments. Teachers and administration will review continued progress and make necessary adjustments to instruction weekly until the end of April. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. 2018-19 CEP 21  ReadyNY practice tests, in house skill of the week quizzes, non-embargoed assessments Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 22  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. In the 2018 School survey, the area of effective school leadership received the rating of 4.09. 96% of teachers agreed that the principal communicates a clear vision and also makes clear the expectations for meeting instructional goals. This year the administration will continue to empower teachers with leadership roles in their grade teams and in their inquiry teams. Teachers have asked for more informal feedback on their pedagogical practice and this year teachers will continue to engage in professional learning walks and instructional rounds to obtain feedback from colleagues in addition to the administration. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019 100% of teachers will be fully engaged in professional learning cycles which includes learning walks and instructional rounds in addition to formal and informal observations to provide them with feedback at least once per month. This will be evidenced by a regular cycle of observations and professional development. 2018-19 CEP 23  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Teachers, consultants, and administration will facilitate professional development by facilitating lab sites and peer coaching colleagues in effective differentiation strategies. These research based methods are meant to build capacity and foster professional learning communities. This will be supported and monitored through learning walks, PD presentations, effective feedback and a regular cycle of observations as a part of effective leadership strategies. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? STH, Lowest 3rd, Ells, Sp. Ed, At- Risk, Eco Disadvtg, Parents, Staff 9/2018-6/2019 Administration, Dean, Teachers, Paraprofessionals, Support Staff Professional development will be provided by consultants and the administration to afford teachers the opportunity to understand the modalities in which students learn best to meet their needs. Students will have access to blended learning opportunities, audio-visual support, reinforcement of taught skills and small group instruction. STH, Lowest 3rd, Ells, Sp. Ed, At- Risk, Eco Disadvantaged, Parents, Staff 9/2018-6/2019 Administration, Dean, Teachers, Paraprofessionals, Support Staff Administration will create regular cycles of observations as a part of effective leadership strategies. Teachers will receive feedback from Administrative informal visits and observations. This will be done at least once per month. Teachers 9/2018-6/2019 Administration, Dean, Teachers, Paraprofessionals, Support Staff 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Parents will be invited to meet with administration on a monthly basis to ask questions and have any concerns addressed. These meetings will also include information about school wide initiatives regarding professional development. Administration will regularly assist with teacher presentations about curriculum and standards during Tuesday parent engagement time. A member of the administrative team will be present to engage families during drop off and pickup. The Principal's Sip and Chat will engender an open door policy for all stakeholders. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 2018-19 CEP 24  In order to accomplish our objectives the use of Smartboards, document cameras, Core Curriculum aligned content area instructional materials, Laptops, tablets, teachers. Consultants, Teacher Leaders, administrators, professional texts, audio equipment for listening centers, practice materials in literacy, math and science will be needed. Common preparation period planning. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy C4E X X Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 100% of classrooms will be engaged in reciprocal teaching and project-based activities in the classroom with no less than two projects introduced, with student choice integrated in project planning.This will be supported and monitored through learning walks, PD presentations, effective feedback and a regular cycle of observations as a part of effective leadership strategies conducted weekly until June. Monthly informal feedback from administration will be tracked through a shared document. By February, 100% of teachers will have received feedback on no less than five times (once per month), including through formal observations, informal observations, and walkthroughs. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Student projects, observations, conference notes, Advance tracker, feedback tracker Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 25  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Parental involvement has been an ongoing priority for our school. Increased involvement last year is reflected in the 86% completion rate of parent surveys in 2018, compared to only 72% of parents in the previous year. At the same time, sign in sheets show us that many parent events were poorly attended, including the June Parent Power Hour workshops and monthly PTA meetings. The parent survey from 2018 shows that only 70% of families say they have had the opportunity to volunteer time to support our school. We seek to increase involvement in ways that will enhance the learning experience for every child and strengthen the partnership with every parent. We will do this in collaboration with our PTA and SLT. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019 we will increase parental involvement in school related events and activities, such as volunteering and helping in classrooms. This increased participation will be reflected in an increase in parent participation in the school survey, with the return rate rising from 86% (in 2018) to 90% or higher. In addition, 50% of families in the school will attend more than one school event as measured by sign in sheets. 2018-19 CEP 26  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Monthly, from September 2018 to June 2019 Community Schools Director, Administration, Afterschool Director, Parent Coordinator, PTA, SLT, Teachers We will host 10 marquee family events, one per month, throughout the school year. All students, all families Each event will include the following:  A catchy name  Advance notice (at least one month ahead) using the monthly calendar, school website, Facebook, Class Dojo, teacher calls, a flyer distributed by afterschool and backpacked home, posters on the school doors, and announcements in the cafeteria Student performances Food/snacks School staff involvement, with one organizer and two additional staff members for logistical support     A parent workshop (30 minutes or less) 10 Proposed Events: September - Back to School Family Night   October - Harvest Feast (with Change For Kids?)  November - PTCs and Music Video Release Party  December - Winter Wishes Celebration (21st) & Holiday Show (20th) January - Multicultural Festival February - Health Fair    March - PTCs and Music Video Release Party  April - Community Forum and Family Night  May - Carnival/BBQ  June - Disney Performance (rehearsal 13th & 14th; opening night 17th; neighboring schools 18th) We will provide additional activities which involve shared learning with parents and their children. We will develop Family Fridays where teachers and parents can spend parent time exploring learning opportunities together since research supports that these partnerships aid in retention of skills. This STH, Lowest 3rd, Ells, Sp. Ed, At- Risk, Eco Disadvtg, Parents, Staff Once per month from September Administration, Dean, Teachers, Paraprofessionals, Support Staff, PTA, SLT 2018-19 CEP 27 will be monitored and supported by collaboratively developed surveys, meetings, and communications between administration, the PTA and SLT. 2018 to June 2019 We will provide English Language Learners and their parents the opportunity to strengthen both their native language and their second language together in Dual Language opportunities. We will offer parents of Special Education students additional seminars and partner learning opportunities to make more transparent the work we do to support these learners. This will be monitored and supported by collaboratively developed surveys, meetings, and communications between administration, the PTA and SLT. In addition to providing many opportunities for joint parent/student learning, will meet with parents to inform them when their students have failed to meet proficiency on weekly examinations and provide strategies for home support. We will also provide engagement opportunities for parents which will be student driven like learning tours. This will be monitored and supported by collaboratively developed surveys, meetings, and communications between administration, the PTA and SLT. Parents will be given opportunities to learn about school programs and events through the school's website. Teachers will communicate with parents about their children's progress and behavior through Class Dojo. Parent needs will also be assessed through informal conversations and surveys in an effort to build trust between parents, students, and the educational community within the school. 9/2018-6/2019 STH, Lowest 3rd, Ells, Sp. Ed, At- Risk, Eco Disadvtg, Parents, Staff Administration, Dean, Teachers, Paraprofessionals, Support Staff,PTA,. SLT Parents 9/2018-6/2019 Administration, Dean, Teachers, Paraprofessionals, Support Staff, PTA, SLT STH, Lowest 3rd, Ells, Sp. Ed, At- Risk, Eco Disadvtg, Parents, Staff 09/2018-6/2019 Administration, CSD, Afterschool Director, Dean, Teachers, Paraprofessionals, Support Staff, PTA,. SLT 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. Inter-faith Medical Center, The Leadership Program, Office of Community Schools Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Our Parent Coordinator, Community Schools Director, and Afterschool Director will work with Administration to achieve these goals. Each event will have one teacher/staff coordinator and two additional staff members for logistics support, plus additional support during the event itself. 21st Century funded positions, such as the Afterschool Director, will help to organize the events. Student performances at these events will in large part be by student groups trained by afterschool instructors using 21st Century funding. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy C4E X X Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Title I TA Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A SIG X PTA Funded In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other 2018-19 CEP 28  Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. In September the CSD and PC will roughly sketch out each of the afterschool events and generate a detailed plan for Family Fridays. By the end of October the CSD and PC will create a system to track family involvement in afterschool events. By the end of October the Afterschool Director will enter applications for at least 90% of the students in the school to begin tracking hours for the 21st Century grant. By December the CSD will conduct a needs assessment with the Advisory Board to determine what workshops parents want incorporated into the remaining parent events. By February at least 50% of the families in the school will have attended one event. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Sign in sheets at events, parent survey participation, answers to specific survey questions Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 29  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Exit slips and reading assessments, and observations Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Close reading of text, shared reading, interactive writing and guided reading, center activities Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Small group One – on – one tutoring as indicated by student need . During the school day Extended day Mathematics Exit slips and math assessments, and observations Science Science assessments, and observations Social Studies project based learning artifacts, assessments, and observations At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) I.E.P mandates, observations, teacher referral, parent Use of math exemplars Number Sense Word problems Geometry, Use of math exemplars Number Sense Word problems Geometry, Document based questions Writing in the content areas project based learning tasks Life skills, conflict resolution, coping strategies, violence prevention, After school During the school day Extended day After school During the Day Small group One – on – one tutoring as indicated by student need. Small group One – on – one tutoring as indicated by student need. During the Day During the Day Small group One – on – one tutoring as indicated by student need. Small group One – on – one tutoring as indicated by student need. 2018-19 CEP 30  referral, student requests. bereavement and loss support 2018-19 CEP 31  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 40 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. STH will be provided uniforms, bookbags and schools supplies upon enrolling at PS 59. Students will also be provided opportunities to enroll in our on site health services, dental, asthma, and physician's visits. Student support staff will be briefed on the students and will avail themselves to support their socio-emotional needs. In addition, support personnel will make contact with parents to offer referral services and parent training services to families. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). n/a 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 CEP 32  n/a 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. n/a 2018-19 CEP 33  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. In order to recruit highly qualified teachers; teaching candidates from Brooklyn College are actively recruited to fill positions due to their preparation for teaching students within our demographics. In addition, these teachers have content knowledge and data evaluation preparedness that puts them firmly on the path of highly qualified teacher status. In order to facilitate effective selection a panel of staff establish interview questions designed to meet the needs of the school and determine if the teaching candidate is a highly qualified teacher. Teachers are also asked to complete a written assessment and provide a lesson plan. We ask candidates who are interviewed during the time of the year when class is in session to conduct a demonstration lesson with students to observe their pedagogy. In order to retain highly qualified teachers, professional development targeted to the teacher's needs is provided by lead teachers, administrators or consultants. Buddy teachers are assigned to new teachers to provide support to ensure that they can effectively provide instruction to students. Ongoing rounds of observations and feedback aligned with the Danielson's Framework for Teaching is implemented in order to assist teachers and administrators in the process of collaboratively setting professional goals for continued pedagogical growth.. Inquiry teams are established across cohorts of early childhood and upper elementary grades to provide additional feedback and support to improve student achievement and pedagogy as a result of review of student work in alignment with lesson goals. We also work to maintain balanced heterogeneous classes on each grade by organizing classes based on the number of ells, special needs students, and students with behavioral concerns as well as academic proficiency. Collegial "walkthroughs", observations and feedback is encouraged and nurtured to sharpen the lens of teachers and to encourage teamwork and reflection. Teacher data is reviewed and results form the basis of administrative-teacher dialogue in order to ensure that teachers are placed in assignments where they can best foster greater student achievement and continue their own professional growth. Teacher identified, and administration verified areas of expertise are celebrated and posted for the whole community so teachers can arrange inter-visitations at any time ensuring a safe environment for teachers to ask for assistance and take risks. Providing support with accountability to outcomes provides a sturdy foundation of a program designed to develop, retain, and nurture highly qualified teachers at our school. Teachers area assigned based on the grades in which they 2018-19 CEP 34  show the greatest success. We look at the pedagogical strength as much as possible, on each grade and assign newer teachers on grades where stronger teacher are already in place. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). a . Align professional development topics to improve and increase teachers’ knowledge of core curriculum state standards alignment across subjects the teachers teach., This includes but is not limited to: PD on reciprocal teaching in reading and math, math fluency, Socratic seminar , Effective Questioning, and Writing,, guided Reading, and Character education. including building a respectful and supportive environment b. Ensure that training is intensive, and ongoing while maintaining a classroom focus in order to have a positive and lasting impact on classroom instruction and teachers’ performance in the classroom; c. Provide research-based professional development to improve student academic achievement. d. Increase and enhance the knowledge and teaching skills of teachers; f. Ensure delivery by individuals who have demonstrated qualifications and credentials in the focus area of the professional development; g. Support the success of all learners including children with special needs, economic disadvantage, and limited English proficiency;including the professional development of paraprofessionals on curriculum support, recording and interpreting progress monitoring data, keeping a log, behavior management support, and language acquisition strategies all in alignment with the common core standards. h. Technology integration as professional development that prepares students for the 21st century and beyond. i. Use data and assessments to determine topics and as training to assist teachers in improve instruction; and they are effectively supported. Ongoing rounds of administrative observations, instructional rounds of teachers, and inquiry teams who provide collegial feedback aligned with the Charlotte Danielson's Framework is implemented in order to assist teachers and administrators in the process of collaboratively setting professional goals for continued pedagogical growth. Professional development, and buddy teachers provide support for newly hired and existing teachers to ensure that they are effectively supported. J. Administration is provided professional development on all content instruction and how to evaluate the effective teaching of the content. This content includes, reading and math,, reciprocal teaching, Socratic seminar, Effective Questioning, Guided Reading, Character education, and how to evaluate pedagogy in these areas. Professional Development on how to support, develop and retain highly qualified teachers, how to build and effective environment, increasing parental involvement, budgeting, curriculum mapping, and effective leadership strategies. This professional development is provided by the Superintendent, the union, and the City of New York as well as partnership agencies like Generation Ready, Literacy Support and Learning gateway. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. 2018-19 CEP 35  n/a 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). n/a Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). It is important to assist students and families with the transition they and their child will make from preschool to Kindergarten and eventually grade school. To this end teachers develop plans to carry out a number of initiatives: ● Including talking with the children about their feelings about the change. Share their own feelings as well.Children should have many opportunities to talk about their fears and concerns. It is okay to say they will miss the students and that they are also proud they're growing up and moving on ● Curriculum from Pre-K and Kindergarten are aligned to that in grades 1-5. In Pre K Students are taught Balanced literacy reading readiness through a curriculum made by Children's Literacy Initiative and blended with the curriculum of N.Y.C. In math students prepare with the Building Blocks Math program. These programs support and align with the Go Math and Ready Gen programs in grades K-5. . ● Write and illustrate a class book about children’s and teachers’ feelings about going to kindergarten. ● Invite a kindergarten teacher to visit their program to explain what happens in kindergarten and answer questions. They prepare the children beforehand by introducing the K-W-L format (what we know, what we want to know, what we have learned). ● Professional Development for Pre-K is done through Citywide days, but during Mondays we supplement City-wide PD with Inquiry and Early Childhood PD cohorts who examine student work and set goals and PD recommendations for all grades PK-2. ● Make a bulletin board about kindergarten using all the photographs and comments from the children. ● Parents are encouraged to visit their child';s classroom to encourage parental involvement. Parents also a kindergarten class or classes several times throughout the year to assist in a smoother transition. When preschool and kindergarten classes do joint activities and exchange records and information about the students, the preschoolers tend to feel more comfortable when moving on to kindergarten. ● Early childhood educators must also help families understand what kindergarten readiness really means. Children who are ready for kindergarten can take care of personal needs such as hand washing and going to the bathroom 2018-19 CEP 36  without support or assistance. In addition, students must regulate their own behavior and express their feelings with words, and can learn math, reading, and other academic skills at the kindergarten level. ● Teachers ensure that students have the motor skills needed for activities requiring coordination and balance, such as bike riding, skipping, or participating in team sports. They must also have to developed the small muscle coordination needed to hold and write with a pencil or other tool. ● Part of the transitioning process is the progress monitoring of students in social, emotional, and physical skills. When students are seen to need support recommendations are made for services early to ensure students do not become at risk. ● Contact day care centers that feed our school and arrange for visits and orientations. We encourage families to: ● Read to their child every day, discuss and ask questions about the story to build comprehension skills ● Provide crayons for drawing and scissors for cutting ● Do playful number activities such as counting, telling the number before and after a quantity, and telling how much you have when there is one more or one less than a quantity. ● Offer markers, Legos, and other small manipulatives to support development of their child’s grasp and fine motor coordination ● Give their child opportunities to make decisions and smart choices ● Institute early bedtimes and provide healthy meals ● Attend an open house in the fall (many schools have these) ● Attend orientation in the spring ● Visit the school and meet the kindergarten teacher Shop for school supplies (prior grade teachers provide a list) 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. Our school gives due consideration to the efficiency of different approaches to assessment. Equal attention must be paid to implementation methods required to provide a full understanding of what is tested, along with the time needed to develop and implement the methods, and score results. Teacher skills and knowledge are equally important factors, as well as the level of support and resources. Teacher input provides essential understandings to ensure effective assessments. Teachers use inquiry time to review student work and performance on assessment to determine, effective intervention strategies, effectiveness of assessment, and alignment of assessment to the lessons provided. This feedback is critical for effective assessment selection. These assessments look at what students learned but of equal importance, what was effectively taught. To this end we created a vertical instructional cabinet team to fulfill this need. Those teachers from across grades look to provide: 2018-19 CEP 37  Knowledge of student learning targets and the nature of the assessments prior to instruction (e.g., knowing what will be tested, how it will be graded, scoring criteria, anchors, exemplars, and examples of performance). Student prerequisite knowledge and skills, including test-taking skills.   Knowledge of students and factors that may influence assessment results.  Knowledge of additional factors unique to their respective grades and child development levels. We provide professional development to teachers on assessments in the following areas, devising meaningful assessments, grading through rubrics, using data from assessments to improve instruction, using data to progress monitor and using data to assist students in setting and achieving goals. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Column B Section Reference(s) 11,14,16,18,21 (sec.5,6,7) 11,14,16,18,21 (sec.5,6,7) 11,14,16,18,21 (sec.5,6,7) n/a 11,14,16,18,21 (sec.5,6,7) Title I Part A (Basic) Federal Title II, Part A Federal Title III, Part A Federal Title III, Immigrant Federal Tax Levy (FSF) Local 248,853 27,069 12,366 0 1,982,260 X X X n/a X 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, 2018-19 CEP 38  State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.  2018-19 CEP 39   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 CEP 40  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. P.S. 59 School, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, our school will:  actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the Comprehensive  Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact;  engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to schools to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; 2018-19 CEP 41  BY:  ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and  strategies as described in our Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills;  maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend our school and will work to ensure that our school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability grade-level curriculum and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home;   provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, Progress Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report;  host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the ESSA; schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings, with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help;     Our school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by:Holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference;  hosting educational family events/activities during 4 Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year;  encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; Parental Involvement and School Quality    schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings, with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestion translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; Our school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by:  Holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference;  hosting educational family events/activities during 4 Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; 2018-19 CEP 42   encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; BY: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement    schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings, with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestion translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; Our school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by:  Holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference;  hosting educational family events/activities during 4 Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year;  encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; School-Parent Compact (SPC) School-Parent Compact (SPC) 14K059, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the ESSA, is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by ESSA; 2018-19 CEP 43  Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; Provide general support to parents by: 2018-19 CEP 44  ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities: ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; 2018-19 CEP 45  ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; III. Student Responsibilities: ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum High Quality Curriculum: Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by ESSA. I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: 2018-19 CEP 46  ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; Provide general support to parents by: 2018-19 CEP 47  ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can 2018-19 CEP 48  understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; Parent/Guardian Responsibilities: II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities 2018-19 CEP 49  ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; III. Student Responsibilities 2018-19 CEP 50  ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully 2018-19 CEP 51  Addendum: Community School Partnerships Directions: The Community School (CS) strategy is directly aligned to the Framework for Great Schools. Community Schools bring schools and community partners together and integrate academics, health, youth development, and family engagement to provide students with the tools and opportunities they need to succeed. The Core Services in Community Schools are Expanded Learning Time (ELT), Attendance Supports, Family Engagement, and Health & Wellness. Part 1 – Community School Partnerships Goal(s) How is the CS strategy integrated into academic instruction at your school, and what impact has it had on student academic outcomes? P.S. 59 has the unique advantage of being both a UFT Community Learning School and an OCS Community School under 21st Century Funding. Both initiatives complement each other in a way that results in a strong community school strategy for the school. During our first full year under both designations, we have seen growth in enrichment and academic programs offered to our students during and after school, increase in the number of health services provided to our students (vision, dental), and the identification and growth of a mental health partner. The CLS strategy engages all key stakeholders (students, teachers, administrators, parents, community members) across a broader range of areas that are crucial to student academic success including health and wellness, supporting educators, academic supports, expanded learning, family engagement, and community engagement. The primary objectives for the CLS strategy for next year are improving student achievement by targeting parent engagement, attendance, and mental health support. Our primary partner CBO through the Office of Community Schools is The Leadership Program. The OCS strategy is focused on providing our school with a high quality after school program. This includes enrichment programming through TLP and academic after school for grades 2-5 provided through per session funding available through this grant. This portion of our community school strategy is to support academic instruction during after school hours with engaging enrichment programming and targeted academic instruction from our own teachers that will aid in test prep and reinforcing specific ELA and math concepts for struggling students. Indicate the summative goal(s) of the Community School for the 2018-19 school year. Be sure to construct the goal to be SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Realistic, and Time-bound. Expanded Learning Time and Academic Support: 1. By October 2018 (start of after school programming), all students in 3-5th grade at ELA level 1 will receive mandatory academic afterschool 2 days per week. 2. By October 2018 (start of after school programming), all students in 3-5th grade at ELA level 2 will be offered homework help for 30 minutes 3 days per week. (transition early morning reading program to after school homework help program) 3. By October 2018 (start of after school programming), a teacher will be identified and hired as a floating staff member to support classroom management, discipline, and dismissal of all after school programming independent of TLP programs. Teacher volunteers will be identified to support initial month of all after school programming. Educator Support: 1. By September 2018, the PD Committee formed in May 2018 will develop a PD calendar for school year based on teacher feedback from focus groups. 2018-19 CEP 52  Family Engagement: 1. By June of 2019 we will increase parental involvement in school related events and activities, such as volunteering and helping in classrooms. This increased participation will be reflected in an increase in parent participation in the school survey, with the return rate rising from 86% to 90% or higher. In addition, by June 50% of families in the school will attend more than one school event as measured by sign in sheets. 2. Health and Wellness: 1. By November 2018, teachers will receive a PD focused on how to identify students in need of a mental health referral. 2. By June 2018, teachers will complete 2 guided referral sessions for their class with any student in need of mental health services being referred to Puerto Rican Family Institute (P.S. 59 mental health partner). Attendance Supports: 1. By June 2019, 50% of students categorized as chronically absent (based on 2017-2018 heat map data) will reach 90% YTD attendance or higher. 2. By June 2019, 50% of students categorized as at risk for being chronically absent (based on 2017-2018 heat map data) will achieve 95% attendance or higher. 3. By June 2019, the school wide average daily attendance rate will be 93%. Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Community School Annual Goal(s): How will achieving your Community School Goal(s)--in Expanded Learning Time (ELT), Attendance Supports, Family Engagement, and Health & Wellness--support your academic goals for students? Attendance and family engagement are two research-tested levers for student achievement. By decreasing the number of chronically absent and at risk students, and by increasing overall attendance metrics, students will be more likely to meet their academic goals. Similarly, by more deeply involving families in school events and classroom activities, family members will be better positioned to help their children meet academic goals. Because our afterschool events will be coupled with family workshops designed to help parents navigate their children’s educational journey, parents who attend will be better able to support homework, learning in various subject areas, test preparation, and other key aspects of learning. Targeting specific student needs based on assessment data for additional remediation during afterschool will help students who are behind close their academic gaps through additional instruction from licensed teachers or homework help from volunteers. This will allow these students to better access the content taught during the day. Supporting educators with professional development to meet their own needs will help them better serve students. Likewise, using a floating staff member to help share best practices with afterschool instructors will improve behavior and support students in getting the most out of their afterschool programming, better positioning them to meet their academic goals. 2018-19 CEP 53  Finally, meeting students’ mental and physical health needs is a prerequisite for the students successfully engaging in their academics. Having a clear process for getting students the extra help they may need will greatly benefit those few students whose mental and physical health needs cannot be met by school staff. Part 2 – Community School Partnerships Core Services Action Plan Part 2a. Identify the Community-based Organization (CBO) partnerships that you will develop in ELT, Attendance Supports, Family Engagement, and Health & Wellness, their target student population(s), and scope of the services provided. As well as supporting schools’ supportive environment and attendance work, CBOs should be helping to support your school’s instructional focus. CBO Partnership TLP, CLS, NY Cares Target Population all 3-5 students at an ELA level 1; all 3-5 students at an ELA level 2 Scope of Service SY18-19 SMART Goal Academic after school ELA program taught by P.S. 59 teachers on Wednesdays and Thursdays from October-June. TLP site coordinator will oversee coordination of programming. By October 2018 (start of after school programming), all students in 3-5th grade at ELA level 1 will receive mandatory academic afterschool 2 days per week. OCS, CLS, TBD early morning program providers chronically absent and at risk students Homework help for 30 minutes 3 days a week from October-June provided by volunteers through a partnership with NY Cares. TLP site coordinator will oversee coordination of programming. CLS CSD will coordinate NY Cares volunteers. CLS CSD and attendance team will use heat map to identify students in risk categories and target for programming. Success Mentoring will be implemented by attendance team. Early morning program providers will be By October 2018 (start of after school programming), all students in 3-5th grade at ELA level 2 will be offered homework help for 30 minutes 3 days per week. (transition early morning reading program to after school homework help program). By June 2019, 50% of students categorized as chronically absent (based on 2017-2018 heat map data) will reach 90% YTD attendance or higher. By June 2019, 50% of students categorized as at risk for being chronically absent 2018-19 CEP 54  UFT CLS All parents DOH Mental Health Consultant, Puerto Rican Family Institute, CLS Teachers; students in need of mental health referral identified and used to target at risk students to improve daily attendance through the use of morning programming CLS CSD will identify and leverage partnerships to plan and implement 10 parent engagement events throughout year including provision of financial support, resource access, and personnel to support event implementation. Partners will work together to create a training for teachers on how to identify students in need of a mental health referral. Partners will implement training with staff and guide 2 sessions throughout the year for teachers to refer students for services. Puerto Rican Family Institute will be the referral site and service provider for identified students. (based on 2017-2018 heat map data) will achieve 95% attendance or higher. By June of 2019 we will increase parental involvement in school related events and activities, such as volunteering and helping in classrooms. This increased participation will be reflected in an increase in parent participation in the school survey, with the return rate rising from 86% to 90% or higher. In addition, by June 50% of families in the school will attend more than one school event as measured by sign in sheets. By November 2018, teachers will receive a PD focused on how to identify students in need of a mental health referral. By June 2018, teachers will complete 2 guided referral sessions for their class with any student in need of mental health services being referred to Puerto Rican Family Institute 2018-19 CEP 55  Part 3 – Budget and Resource Alignment (P.S. 59 mental health partner). Part 3a. Indicate resources your Community Partnership will leverage to achieve your summative SMART goal(s) and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. To provide a higher quality, more consistent, structured after school program, we will require an additional staff member to provide support for discipline in our our of school programming plan. Resources to pay a P.S. 59 teacher will be required to hire this person. As part of our targeted approach to providing academic after school and homework help, we will leverage our partnership with NY Cares to build a volunteer team to offer homework help to students in our after school program. A comprehensive and successful attendance initiative will require additional personnel. We want to expand our Success Mentor program but will need additional mentors to reach all students in need of the program. For parent engagement events (goal of 10 next year), we will need financial support to provide high quality events that include food and incentives for parents and students. Adjustments to the professional development calendar will also be made to include trauma training and mental health referral training for teachers. Part 3b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) Title I SWP Title III Title I TA X PTA Funded P/F Set-aside X 21st Century C4E SIG Grant School Achievement X Other Funding Part 3c. Describe how the school will partner with the Lead CBO to do the following: 1. Community Schools are expected to partner with a community-based partner organization (CBO) and together with members of the School Leadership Team, hire a Community School Director. The Director will lead implementation of the asset and needs assessment process, and other critically important coordinating activities. Indicate how you will leverage this aspect of the work. Community Schools are expected to personalize the needs of all students, through strategic programming and services, as determined by the asset and needs assessment, and must also offer Expanded Learning Time (ELT) and mental health programming. In completing this section, ensure that you think about how: (1) the right services are provided to the right students and families at the right time; and (2) how you will seamlessly coordinate services with instructional programming happening throughout and outside of the school day. Indicate how you will implement this work, and describe other programming you anticipate to be in place to strengthen this initiative. Community Schools are expected to emerge as Partnership Schools, which are places where parents and families feel welcome, actively participate in the conversation and decision-making around the renewal of their schools, and have many opportunities to advocate for their children. Monthly meetings and Community School Forums engaging families and community stakeholders will be a critical part of this family engagement strategy. Describe how you will implement this aspect of the work. Community School Principals are expected to meet on a weekly basis with their Community School Director, select Assistant Principals, key staff, and other CBOs, to analyze trends in data and case manage individual students. Data tools – including the New Visions Data Sorter - and training will be available for schools to use. Indicate how you will implement this aspect of the work. 2. 3. 4. 2018-19 CEP 56  Through 21st Century Funding, our lead OCS CBO is The Leadership Program. This year a Site Coordinator was hired and that person works closely with our existing CLS Community School DIrector to implement our Community School Strategy. The CLS CSD is already in the process of implementing the annual needs assessment to guide programs and services for next year. The TLP Site Coordinator and CSD hosted a successful Community School Forum this year which will inform after school programming and parent engagement activities for next year. Teacher focus groups were held at the end of this year to gather information from staff around student and staff needs. Students will be surveyed at the beginning of next year to identify interests in enrichment and academic programming. All data will be used to make decisions around after school programming, potential partners, health service provision, and family engagement events. Administration participate in both community school teams and meet weekly with the CLS Community School Director to make sure goals align with the greater school vision and strategy. Part 4 – Community School Partnerships Oversight Part 4a. Key Staff and Partners 1. Name and describe the scope of involvement of all community partners working in the school (include partners supporting ELT, counseling, enrichment, etc.) 2. Name the members of your Community School Team and how meetings will be organized and structured to engage all stakeholders and be focused on results. 3. Explain data strategies including the use of the data sorter, and steps that the school will take to ensure that the appropriate interventions are provided to the right students 1. We have community partners who provide programming and services within the school. a. Health and Wellness: NYU Langone provides a full dental clinic inside school; Puerto Rican Family Institute sits on our CLS Advisory Board and is our primary mental health partner; DOH Mental Health Consultant sits on our CLS Advisory Board, Parent Engagement Committee, and Wellness Council and provides PDs to teachers around trauma and stress management; Optical Academy provided vision screening and free glasses to all consented students b. Direct student academic and enrichment program providers: Bilingual Birdies (bilingual music PreK program); BRIC (animation and visual arts); Digital Girl (coding); Keys to Abundant Life (cooking); Trinity Wall Street (choir); Disney Musicals in Schools (theater); The Leadership Program (primary after school provider); NY Cares (robotics and early morning reading program) c. Family engagement: NY Cares (family night activities); Common Threads (family cooking class) 2. We have 2 primary community school teams: a. As a UFT Community Learning School, we guide the initiative using the collective decision making of our CLS Advisory Board. The board functions to collectively make decisions and most members are vocal in expressing thoughts and opinions. We have 3 very engaged community partners who are active members of our board. Data review is a primary component of advisory board meetings. Our advisory board is made of 11 members, including: 3 community partners (NY Cares, Puerto Rican Family Institute, DOH), 1 parent (PTA rep) and 1 grandparent (Parent Coordinator), 2 teachers (4th grade and physical edu), Guidance counselor, CSD, 1 CLS rep, 1 member of administration (AP) b. Under the Office of Community Schools we have a team that coordinates the activities under 21st Century Funding. This team consists of the principal, AP, UFT Community School Director, The Leadership Program Site Coordinator, OCS Program Manager, and 2 evaluators. 2018-19 CEP 57  3. Data is used to guide the goal setting and decision making of all community school teams. Data review is a crucial piece of the UFT CLS Advisory Board Meetings. Each year a needs assessment is completed including parent and teacher focus groups, parent and teacher surveys and review of school wide data as a way of guiding priorities and making decisions on programs and services to provide. Test scores, reading levels, chronic absenteeism, and other data are used to target students for academic and enrichment program enrollment and service provision. This spring the data sorter was used in attendance meetings. Next year, attendance team meetings will be more strategically guided by data in the heat map as a way of targeting students for programming and initiatives aimed at improving attendance. Likewise, academic after school programming will be targeted based on data that helps us identify struggling students. Part 4b. Indicate resources needed including human resources, instructional resources, and schedule adjustments to implement the Community School program. To provide a higher quality, more consistent, structured after school program, we will require an additional staff member to provide support for discipline in our our of school programming plan. Resources to pay a P.S. 59 teacher will be required to hire this person. As part of our targeted approach to providing academic after school and homework help, we will leverage our partnership with NY Cares to build a volunteer team to offer homework help to students in our after school program. A comprehensive and successful attendance initiative will require additional personnel. We want to expand our Success Mentor program but will need additional mentors to reach all students in need of the program. For parent engagement events (goal of 10 next year), we will need financial support to provide high quality events that include food and incentives for parents and students. Adjustments to the professional development calendar will also be made to include trauma training and mental health referral training for teachers. Part 4c. Timeline for implementation and completion, including start and end dates. June 2018-August 2018  CSD to develop comprehensive attendance initiative plan with lists of students for different attendance focused programs based on heat map September 2018  First meeting of PD committee to review teacher feedback and plan PD schedule for the year that incorporates teacher voice  Parent surveys  Student surveys to gain information on student interests for academic and enrichment activities to guide programming October 2018  Hire staff member to provide additional after school coordination and discipline support  Launch targeted after school academic and enrichment programming November 2018 2018-19 CEP 58  Teacher PD for mental health referral training September 2018-June 2019  Host 10 parent engagement events (one per month)  Weekly attendance team meetings with data review  Monthly CLS Advisory Board meetings Part 4d. Mental Health Work Plan Separate from this S/CEP, schools will complete a Mental Health Work Plan that will become an addendum to this document. 2018-19 CEP 59  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 14 School Name William Floyd Borough Brooklyn School Number 059 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Cherry-Ann Joseph-Hislop Coach N/A ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Charlie Vargas Teacher/Subject Area Rabiyah Abdurrahman/IEP Teacher/Subject Area Lolita Torres/ Gr 3 Related-Service Provider Sherese Stephenson Superintendent Alicja Winnicki Assistant Principal Zachary Mack Coach N/A School Counselor Aime Ferdinand Parent Theresa Reed Parent Coordinator Nilsa Torres Field Support Center Staff Member Camilla Holmes Other (Name and Title) type here C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 1 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 1 3 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 3 0 D. Student Demographics 2018-19 CEP 60  Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 270 Total number of ELLs 42 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 15.56% Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 1 2 0 1 1 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 1 1 0 1 1 3 0 0 4 0 0 5 0 6 0 7 0 8 0 9 0 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 3 0 0 3 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? Students in ENL and Dual Language classrooms use multiple assessments. In literacy students are assessed through teacher created assessments, Estrellita and TCRWP assessments. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? Guided reading, small group instruction and after-school ELL academy. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? NYC Performance Tasks, Performance series, TCRWP and ELL periodic assessments. 2018-19 CEP 61  4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? Small group instruction, after school ELL academy and Individual teacher-student conferences. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] The school uses the baseline and benchmark assessments to gather data on student progress and to inform and guide instruction. Students are placed into instructional groups that address their ongoing academic needs; and teachers use the student data to monitor student academic growth and achievement. The data also allows teachers to remediate academic deficits. Teachers are provided professional development that supports this work and inquiry time is used to review student work to identify next instructional steps. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. NYSITELL, NYSESLAT, TCRWP as well as ELA and Math State assessments. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? Teachers and administration disaggregate the data from the ELL data analysis tools during weekly Inquiry team meetings and create plans to increase to the academic achievement of each student. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. Beginner / Entering 360 minutes- 180minutes standalone / 180 minutes of integrated ENL Low Intermediate / Emerging- 360 minutes- 90 minutes standalone / 180 integrated ENL Intermediate / Transitioning 180minutes - 90 minutes integrated / 90 minutes integrated with ELA or other content area Advanced / Expanding 180 minutes of integrated ENL Proficient / Commanding 90 minutes / 90 minutes integrated ENA / ELA or other content areas b. TBE program. If applicable. N/A c. DL program. If applicable. The Dual Language program is done on a 50:50 Model whereby the target language is taught on alternating. 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? As previously noted: Beginner / Entering 360 minutes- 180minutes standalone / 180 minutes of integrated ENL Low Intermediate / Emerging- 360 minutes- 90 minutes standalone / 180 integrated ENL Intermediate / Transitioning 180minutes - 90 minutes integrated / 90 minutes integrated with ELA or other content area 2018-19 CEP 62  Advanced / Expanding 180 minutes of integrated ENL Proficient / Commanding 90 minutes / 90 minutes integrated ENA / ELA or other content areas 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. Content-core is delivered either in English or in Spanish through a workshop mode. Students receive instruction using strategies such as differentiated instruction, and each lesson also include a content and language objective to ensure content learning and English language development. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? Students are given the SOLOM, ELL periodic assessments and the NYSITELL is done for all new students. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status Differentiation of instruction is done in compliance to individual student strengths and weaknesses as well as through a combination of assessed language levels. There are 0 SIFE students currently at our school and those who are newcomers, developing, and former ELLs are ensured proper scaffolding and differentiation with graphic organizers, charts and picture dictionaries. There are no long term ELLs in our school. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? Students are provided with differentiated lessons that allow for multiple entry points which supports their individual instructional needs. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? All ELL-SWDs are provided instruction using an ICT model. Students are provided access to the curriculum through the following instructional strategies: Small group instruction, collaborative group, and reciprocal teaching. Academic intervention is programmed into the scheduling as well to support the achievement of IEP goals and to enhance their English proficiency. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. The after school program and ELL academy provides targeted intervention for ELLs in ELA, Math and other content areas that are aligned to the skill of the week and other assessments. Additionally students receive small group/differentiated intervention in the classroom 3 days per week where the focus is on meeting the instructional needs of each student. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? Common Planning for ENL and Dual language teachers. ELL clubs and ENL Community Services are also being considered. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? None 2018-19 CEP 63  11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. Our ELLs receive access to all after-school related activities as well as special school-wide clubs i.e. journalism, dance, drama and coding. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. Students receive a minimum of one period per week on technology that supports content area learning. Students are exposed to instructional materials like ReadyGen, GoMath, and Word study. Our emerging ELLs receive language development through intensive word study as well as links to on-line resources like Rosetta Stone and Starfall. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Home language support is provided to both our ENL and DL students through their respective instructional models, i.e., push-in and pull-out language services and alternating days of instruction in Spanish or English based on the 50:50 dual language model. Through this targeted approach, both our dual language and ENL programs are supported by using the primary language(s) as an instructional support mechanism to enhance content learning and second language acquisition. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. Through ongoing monitoring of classroom schedules and targeted instructional services, informal classroom walk-throughs as well as professional learning communities where teachers engage in discussions about student achievement and next instructional steps, the staff is able to ensure that ELLs are being supported and all related services and resources are age and grade level appropriate. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? Although we are co-located, we do not share resources between schools. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). Newly enrolled ELLs are introduced to all school-wide community members. The ENL teacher, Principal, Assistant Principal, Guidance Counselor and Parent Coordinator all assist the ELL and guidance and monitoring of all activities at the beginning of the school year (i.e., Meet-and-Greet with parents and students and, classroom interviews to get to know their classmates). 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? none 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? The school has adopted and implements with fidelity the 50:50 self-contained dual language model. Our emergent literacy is taught sequentially. The self-contained dual language model supports the child's home language and bi-literacy is developed simultaneously. ELA (English and Spanish) Word Study (English and Spanish) 2018-19 CEP 64  Math (English and Spanish) Social Studies (English and Spanish) Science (English) Technology (English) Physical Ed. (English) Writing (English and Spanish) Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? Monthly district-wide meetings, turnkey sessions, professional readings, inquiry meetings. Through NYC DOE webinars, training, as well communication from engageny. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. On going communication with the next ENL teacher to ensure proper transitions and tracking their progress. Teachers meet for professional development receiving adequate resources, strategies for working with ELLs. We believe that all teachers are teachers of ELLs and with such teachers are sent to other schools to receive the training that would enhance their practice. ENL and Dual Language teachers are aware of CR Part 154 as well as monolingual teachers. After attending our teacher training, teachers receive a certificate entailing their time. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? We hold our annual ELL Parent Conference during the evening. This event is help in our library / research center. At the meeting, translators are available to meet with parents to foster a sense of appreciation. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Our ELL parent involvement include volunteering, assisting students and staff on field trips. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Paste response here: 2018-19 CEP 65  2018-19 CEP 66 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Cherry Ann Joseph-Hislop, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 CEP 67  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: William Floyd School School DBN: 14K059 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Title Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) Cherry-Ann Joseph-Hislop Principal Zachary Mack Assistant Principal Nilsa Torres Parent Coordinator Charlie Vargas ENL/Bilingual Teacher Theresa Reed Parent Lolita Torres Teacher/Subject Area Rabiyah Abdurrahman / IEP Teacher/Subject Area None None Coach Coach Aime Ferdinand School Counselor Alicja Winnicki Camilla Holmes N/A N/A N/A Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member N/A Other N/A Other N/A Other N/A 9/29/18 9/29/18 9/29/18 9/29/18 9/29/18 9/29/18 9/29/18 9/29/18 9/29/18 9/29/18 9/29/18 9/29/18 N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 CEP 68  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 14k059 School Name: PS 59 William Floyd Superintendent: Alicja Winnicki The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No (*Primary) * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. The school reviews the HLS surveys of students enrolled in PS 59 to determine home languages of students. In addition, non-English speaking parents whose language can’t be identified when coming to enroll students, are given a chart to identify their language. In addition we collect language information from ATS, the Blue Card, Parent Surveys, Teacher Surveys, and parent interviews, We generate a report monthly which is updated regularly to reflect the languages parents speak. This information is generated and reviewed by class and grade. Once the languages in the school were determined, all correspondence is translated into that language to provide parents with timely information. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. 2018-19 CEP 69  Language Spanish, Seneca, Arabic Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. The school will provide translation services to any parent whose primary language is other than English for any and all communication from school to home. Translation will be conducted by in-house staff, including but not limited to; our Parent Coordinator, teachers, school aides, and volunteers. For translation services required after the instructional day staff will be compensated per session. Where translation services are not available for a parent’s language the Office of Translation and Interpretation services will be utilized. In order to ensure that translation services are provided in a timely fashion we notify the office of Translation services the by August 30 for the September 17 parent conferences, by October 15th for the November 5th parent conferences, February 9th for the March 3rd conferences and April 11th for the May 12th conferences. All school newsletters, General School letters, calendars, letters regarding discipline, safety, and health will be translated. In addition, teachers will be required to translate all letters home where 10% of 2018-19 CEP 70  the class has a home language other than English. Where possible students with translation needs will be placed in a classroom where the teacher or paraprofessional can perform this service. If translation is not possible in a timely fashion, the information will be conveyed via an interpreter until translations can be completed. While all major communications to parents are translated (Principal’s letters to parents, notices of school closings and events, etc.) some communications home from teachers are not translated at present. Presently, the only translated language needed at our school is Spanish. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide interpretation service(s)? Throughout the year parents typically are involved in a variety of formal and informal meeting opportunities including: General inquiries, parent-teacher conferences (Nov. & Mar.), school curriculum nights (Sept. & May), educational planning meetings, workshops, and student progress conferences. In the event of unscheduled calls staff are required to check the blue emergency card of the student to identify the preferred language and arrange for the call to be conducted by an staff member fluent in that language. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. 2018-19 CEP 71  Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) PS 59 provides each parent whose primary language is a covered language and who requires language assistance services with a copy of the Bill of Parent Rights and Responsibilities which includes their rights regarding translation and interpretation services. We distribute this upon the enrollment of a new student. This process is done in connection with the mandates under Title III Bilingual/ESL services regulations stipulating a conference with non-English speaking parents to apprise them of their right to bilingual classes for their child. In addition, we post in a conspicuous location at or near the primary entrance and main office a sign in each of the covered languages, or most prominent covered languages, indicating the availability of interpretation services. Our safety plan contains procedures for ensuring that parents in need of language assistance services are not prevented from reaching the school’s administrative offices solely due to language barriers. We afford parents the opportunity to connect with a person to translate for them during any efforts to communicate with the school. We review these provisions as part of our safety meetings a minimum of twice per year. We provide the parents of more than 10% of the children at our school who speak a primary language that is neither English nor a covered language through the Translation and Interpretation Unit a translation into their language, any signage and forms required per Chancellor’s Regulations A-663. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? Parents are interviewed at the time of enrollment to determine their language preference. in addition parents are surveyed to determine their language preference among other communication preferences. We will also conduct a focus group of parents representing the different languages we currently host in our school to solicit ideas for best practices and ways to improve our language services to parents and families. 2018-19 CEP 72 
