2018-19 SCHOOL COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (SCEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 17K061 School Name: M.S. 061 DR. GLADSTONE H. ATWELL Principal: DEWANA DAIDS 2018-19 SCEP-FF 1  School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) Section 4: SCEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 SCEP-FF 2  School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information M.S. 061 Dr. Gladstone H. Atwell 00000000000000000 6,7,8,SE School Number (DBN): 17K061 400 Empire Boulevard, Brooklyn, NY 11225 718-774-1002 Phone Number: 718-467-4335 Fax: Dewana Daids ddaids@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Dewana Daids Email Address: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Ms. Sandra Amede Ms. Joanne Trellis Ms. Wendy Ann Soya N/A JudithMercedes District Information Geographical District: 17 Mr. Clarence Ellis Superintendent: 1224 Park Place Brooklyn NY 11213 Superintendent’s Office Address: cellis3@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: (718) 221-4372 Phone Number: 718-221-4372 Fax: Brooklyn South FSC: Field Support Center (FSC) Executive Director: MauriciereDeGovia 2018-19 SCEP-FF 3  Executive Director’s Office Address: 415 89 th Street Brooklyn NY 11209 MDegovi@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 718-240-3677 Phone Number: 718-240-3677 Fax: 2018-19 SCEP-FF 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the SCEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Dewana Daids Ms. Sandra Amede Joanne Trellis Judith Mercedes Mary Venning CarlethaWoodley *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/ Parent Member/ Parent 2018-19 SCEP-FF 5  Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Lisa Simon Nancy Quarless Joanne Felix Mr. Bryan Mariner TiashemaJackson Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/Teacher Member/ Teacher Member/ Teacher Member/ Teacher Member/Teacher/SLTChair Member/Parent Member/Parent Member/ 2018-19 SCEP-FF 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the School Comprehensive Educational Plan The School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) is a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. The process of developing and implementing the SCEP is aligned to the Framework for Great Schools. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding SCEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and informed by New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department has established programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students supports to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and SCEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint for continuous improvement that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to increase student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a 2018-19 SCEP-FF 7  comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five (5) goals and action plans that align with the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. Accountability Tools and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is informed by the New York State Education Department’s (NYSED) Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) Tenets, the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Rubric, School Quality Guide and other quantitative and qualitative data tools. NYSED’s Six DTSDE Tenets To strengthen the existing system, the NYSED has developed a tool that captures the best practices from each of the current tools called the Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness. This new tool encompasses multiple instruments such as interviews, classroom observations and surveys. The protocol will begin with a clear and cogent statement of the optimal conditions of an effective school and the instruments comprising the protocol will measure how close or far away a particular school is to the optimal conditions identified. Once reviewed, the school and district will create a strategic plan to address the areas in need of improvement. All current Priority and Focus Schools and Focus Districts must use the tool; districts that are required to submit District Comprehensive Improvement Plans and Comprehensive Educational Plans also will use the tool. The DTSDE protocol includes a rubric, which identifies clear and coherent expectations of the optimal conditions of an effective school and school district across the following six tenets:  Tenet 1: District Leadership and Capacity  Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions  Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support  Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions  Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health, and  Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality 2018-19 SCEP-FF 8  Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The 2017-18 Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) I. II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Structures for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the SCEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the SCEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. Next Steps for SCEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: In Part 1A of the Section 5: Needs Assessment indicate the Statement of Practice (SOP) from the DTSDE Tenets that will be addressed in the action plan. Schools that received an Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) School Review should use the recommendations from the review to select their SOPs. Schools that did not undergo an IIT review should select SOPs informed by the major findings/recommendations from your most recent Quality Review (QR) or Central-led Review (CLR), and other qualitative and quantitative data. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 9   Step 4: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 5: Build consensus around activities, strategies and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 6: Implement at least one USDE Turnaround Principle (e.g., redesign the school day, week, or year; modify the instructional program to ensure it is Evidence-based, rigorous, and aligned with State academic content standards; provide time for collaboration on the use of) beginning no later than the 2018-19 school year.  Step 7: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 8: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 10  Section 4: SCEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Dr. Gladstone H. Atwell Middle School 61 is dedicated to equitably developing the intellect, creativity, and emotional intelligence of all students in a rigorous, inclusive and nurturing setting. We ensure readiness for college, career and life, where students are empowered to think critically and independently and are able to discuss, defend and substantiate their reasoning. In every classroom, teachers use ongoing assessments to guarantee every student is engaged with authentic learning experiences and work products. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. M.S. 61 serves currently 670 students as of September 19, 2018, spanning grades 6 through 8. The demographics of our student body are as follows: Black/African-American (89%), Hispanic/Latino (9%), White (1%), and Asian (1%). Our student body includes English language learners (6%) and students with disabilities (13%). Our gender demographics are as follows: Girls (53%), Boys (48%). The average student attendance rate for school year 2017-2018 was 90.5%. The safety and security of our middle school students is paramount to their academic, social, and emotional well-being. In support of this effort, school leaders and staff actively maintain a positive presence throughout the school day, greeting and welcoming students and families, while ensuring smooth, safe and timely transitions to/from classrooms and activities. At the core of our school improvement plan implementation is professional team work. Time and opportunity is build into our school schedule for collaboration among our faculty, which is often used for creating/revising curricular materials and lesson plans; compiling and analyzing student work products, data and assessments; and developing/modifying action plans to address specific student needs. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. In 2015-16, M.S. 61’s students with disabilities achieved Safe Harbor for Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP). M.S. 61’s 2017 state test results reflect a decrease in Level 3 & 4 students with disabilities (Math: 2016=10%; 2017=2%. ELA: 2016=9%; 2017=5%). SWDs require specific scaffolds and strategies along with Specially Designed Instruction (SDI) to meet their needs. M.S. 61 was identified in 2015 by the Brooklyn South Field Support Center (FSC) as a “Spotlight School” based upon data reflecting low academic progress of our students with disabilities. Based on an agreement between the NYCDOE and the New York State Education Department, Spotlight schools are schools that have been deemed by the Borough Field Support Center, in collaboration with the Superintendent, to require additional support for Students with Disabilities in one or more of the following areas: Quality Individual Education Plans (IEPs), Access, Behavior and Transition planning. Identified Spotlight Schools receive targeted support from the FSC, including capacity building that helps to guide schools in fostering learning communities that are inclusive of all students. (CONTINUE TO FOCUS ON STUDENTS WITH DISABILITIES) Hispanic/Latino Subgroup: M.S. 61’s 2017 state test results reflect a significant decrease in Level 3 & 4 Hispanic/Latino students (Math: 2016=24%; 2017=11%. ELA: 2016=31%; 2017=19%). The ENL students require scaffolds, modification and specific strategies to meet their needs. The area of Focus School identification in 2015-16 was the performance of the “Hispanic” subgroup. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 11  4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. Area of Progress: Strong Family-Community Ties: On M.S. 61’s March 2017 Quality Review, our school received a “Well Developed” rating for indicator 3.4 (Establish a culture for learning that communicates high expectations to staff, students and families, and provide supports to achieve those expectations). This indicator was identified by our reviewer as our “Area for Celebration.” M.S. 61’s School Quality Report reflected the following areas of strength: 90% of parents/guardians responded that they are satisfied or very satisfied with the education their child has received this year (Question 5b). 93% of parents/guardians responded that they are satisfied with the response they get when they contact M.S. 61 (Question 5a). 91% of parents/guardians agreed or strongly agreed that they are satisfied or very satisfied with the overall quality of their child’s teacher this year (Question 5c). 92% of parents/guardians agreed or strongly agreed that M.S. 61 makes them aware if there are any emotional or psychological issues affecting their child’s academic performance (Question 2d). 94 % of parents/guardians agreed or strongly agreed that School Safety Agents promote a safe and respectful environment at M.S. 61 (Question 2g). M.S. 61 encourages its students to have a growth mindset, which supports our belief that students can develop their talents through hard work, good strategies, and input from others. Our school has attracted additional resources from and created partnerships with families, businesses, and community organizations through outreach and sustaining a welcoming school environment. Our school received over $1.5 million in grants, which were used for academic achievement, AIS, student incentives and parent involvement. During Summer 2017, three wellness programs were funded by community organizations, which will continue during school year 2017-18 thanks to funding from State Senator Jesse Hamilton. Key Areas of Focus: Rigorous Instruction and Collaborative Teachers  Framework for Great Schools Element — Rigorous Instruction: M.S. 61’s 2017 state test results reflect a significant decrease in Level 3 & 4 student performance on the ELA exam (2016=31.2%; 2017=26.4%) and Math exam (2016=23.5%; 2017=17.6%). M.S. 61’s March 2017 Quality Review feedback identified indicator 4.1 (Observe teachers using the Danielson Framework for Teaching along with the analysis of learning outcomes to elevate school-wide instructional practices and implement strategies that promote professional growth and reflection) as M.S. 61’s “Area of Focus.” This indicator was rated “Developing.”  Framework for Great Schools Element- Collaborative Teachers: M.S. 61’s March 2017 Quality Review feedback also rated indicator 4.2 (Engage in structured professional collaborations on teams using an inquiry approach that promotes shared leadership and focuses on improved student learning) as “Developing.” 5. Identify at least one USDE Turnaround Principle (e.g., redesign the school day, week, or year; modify the instructional program to ensure it is Evidence-based, rigorous, and aligned with State academic content standards; provide time for collaboration on the use of data) to be implemented in the 2018-19 school year. Providing adequate time to analyze data, create action plans and execute in the classrooms to impact student achievement 2018-19 SCEP-FF 12  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 17K061 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 06,07,08 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 725 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 43 43 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 51 50 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 70.0% % Attendance Rate 69.4% % Reduced Lunch 5.8% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) 0.4% 9.2% 1.0% % Black or African American % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 1.86 0% 11% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 36.6% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No No Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups Hispanic Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A NO N/A NO NO Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A NO N/A NO NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A YES High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 63 63 90.9% 1.9% 19.2% 86.8% 2.5% 0.6% 10 14% 7.9 29.6% 33% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No Yes YES N/A N/A NO NO NO N/A N/A NO NO YES N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 SCEP-FF 13  2018-19 SCEP-FF 14  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 3 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 3.2 The school leader ensures and supports the quality implementation of a systematic plan of rigorous and coherent curricula appropriately aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS) that is monitored and adapted to meet the needs of students. Teachers develop and ensure that unit and lesson plans used include data-driven instruction (DDI) protocols that are appropriately aligned to the CCLS and NYS content standards and address student achievement needs. The school leader and teachers have developed a comprehensive plan for teachers to partner within and across all grades and subjects to create interdisciplinary curricula targeting the arts, technology, and other enrichment opportunities. Teachers implement a comprehensive system for using formative and summative assessments for strategic short and long-range curriculum planning that involves student reflection, tracking of, and ownership of learning. 3.3 3.4 3.5 SOP(s) Addressed x Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Teachers of M.S. 61 have the opportunity during common planning to share lesson plans. Our use of Code X Common Core (Houghton Mifflin Harcourt), assists teachers with implementing the CCLS by particularly focusing on text complexity by providing complex informational texts as well as narrative, persuasive and informative writing. This adopted program has a strong emphasis on academic vocabulary, scaffold strategies and learning by developing a deep understanding of concepts critical for literacy and math across the grades but the program lacks instructional material to support students' writing. Additionally, there is also professional development from the Middle School Quality Initiative (MSQI) coordinator and coach to help implement instructional strategies. Additionally, a professional consultant provides professional development and instructional strategies as support. Teacher's College Writing Program (TCWP) was added to improve students' writing but it does not address how to modify for the needs of all learners. MSQI will help support the writing strategies. The school continues to expose students to a variety of coursework focused on infusing rigor into their learning. In order to close the achievement gap and promote post secondary readiness in all grades, the school offers Regents classes. In addition to MSQI and TCWP, there is EngageNY, guided reading materials, Wilson, Great Leaps, practices from Algebra 2018-19 SCEP-FF 15  for All, and teacher created CCLS curricula to support our literacy and math goals for the school year. Resources and technology from these vendors will also be used as support. This year we will create an observation action cycle to ensure that our teachers are observed more than the basic minimum and complete the observation calendar by mid-year to ensure frequent and consistent feedback. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, all teachers will intentionally design and deliver rigorous instruction which will provide differentiated support to each student as evidenced by lesson and unit plans aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS), whereas 75% of all students will make 1 year’s growth of reading gains as measured by Degrees of Reading Power (DRP) levels. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 16  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). One area that teachers could receive PD is good questioning strategies (Survey: only 46% of students responded that, in most or all of their classes, teachers ask difficult questions in class, Question 5c; Only 54% of teachers responded that a lot or all of the students in the classes respond to challenging questions in class - Question 19g). To identify student academic strengths and weaknesses, teacher teams will analyze data from the 2017 state assessment results along with baseline data generated in September 2017 from preliminary content areas assessments (e.g., Degrees of Reading Power and the I-Ready ELA assessment. Educators will generate and administer three interim assessments during the school year to assess areas of growth and to help teachers target instruction to student needs. Teachers will independently and collaboratively review their teaching practices and instructional approaches based upon student data and promotional requirements. Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Teachers September 2018 – June 2019 Administrators Students September 2018 – June 2019 Administration and Teachers Boost vocabulary development using resources such as Ready NYCCLS, Common Core Crosswalk, Mastering the Standards, IReady, Lightsail (grade 6 only) DRP (grade 6 only) Wilson, Great Leaps and Imagine Learning. Students will be scheduled to utilize IReady and Lighsail a minimum of once weekly General Ed, Lowest 1/3 SWD and ENL's Start Early Bird and After school ELA and mathematics tutoring by November 2017 General Ed, Lowest 1/3 September 2018 – June 2019 Administration, and Teachers September 2018 – June 2019 Administration and Teachers To support parents with understanding how to support their children with meeting the expectations of the CCLS, and with preparing for their State exams, starting in January, until April, various Saturdays parents will be invited to the school for training sessions dedicated to addressing their needs. SWD and ENL's 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 17  Middle school will host a curriculum night in September to familiarize parents with CCLS curriculum across the content areas. Administration and lead teachers will develop PowerPoint and resource packets to provide to parents. The parent coordinator will host an overview of the CCLS in February. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Professional development will be delivered by our lead teachers, our peer collaborative teachers, outside consultants, workshops for parents will be conducted by teacher leaders. The observation schedule will demonstrate an opportunity to observe as well as an opportunity to sit with the teacher to demonstrate feedback. Parent engagement funds are being used for parent workshops. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Tax Levy X Title I SWP X Title I TA Title I 1003(a) Title III PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. . By February 2019, all teachers will intentionally design and deliver rigorous instruction which will provide differentiated support to each student evidenced by lesson and unit plans aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS), whereas 40% of students will make 1 year’s growth of reading gains as measured by Degrees of Reading Power (DRP) levels. In February 2019 our Winter DRP evidenced the following from the Fall DRP: 6th grade 187 tested and 62% showed some growth or made 1 year's growth (110 students) 7th grade 168 tested and 60% showed some growth or made 1 year's growth (63 students) 8th grade 247 tested and 66% showed some growth or made 1 year's growth (125 students) Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 18 DRP (Degrees of Reading Power) Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 19  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 5 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 5.2 The school leader establishes overarching systems and understandings of how to support and sustain student social and emotional developmental health and academic success. 5.3 The school articulates and systematically promotes a vision for social and emotional developmental health that is aligned to a curriculum or program that provides learning experiences and a safe and healthy school environment for families, teachers, and students. 5.4 All school stakeholders work together to develop a common understanding of the importance of their contributions in creating a school community that is safe, conducive to learning, and fostering of a sense of ownership for providing social and emotional developmental health supports tied to the school’s vision. 5.5 The school leader and student support staff work together with teachers to establish structures to support the use of data to respond to student social and emotional developmental health needs. X X SOP(s) Addressed Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? *************** What needs are priority? Based on what data? What formative/summative data, e.g., OORS was reviewed? On School Quality Survey, only 63% of students responded that they learn a lot from feedback on their work (Question 2a). Only 66% of students responded that their homework assignments help them to learn course material Question 2d). Only 64% of teachers responded that students in their classes build on each other’s ideas during class discussion (Question 18a); Only 67% of teachers responded that students in their classes show that they respect each other’s ideas (Question 18c); Only 63% of teachers responded that students in their class Provide constructive feedback to their peers/teachers (Question 18d). 2018-19 SCEP-FF 20  How will you build upon the efforts to cultivate effective partnerships and foster students’ personal and academic development? Need specificity and trends.************* According to last year’s Learning Environment Survey “The school is a safe place which cultivates effective partnerships and students appreciate the level of support they receive thus fostering their personal and academic development.” Our school wide priority is to sustain these efforts toward effectively addressing students social emotional and academic needs in order to prepare them for College and Career Readiness. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools –Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, students will demonstrate a sense of ownership of their socio-emotional growth via the use of Therapeutic Crisis Intervention Services (TCIS) and Restorative Justice Practices, whereas 75% of all students will make 1 year’s growth as measured by Degrees of Reading Power (DRP) levels. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 21  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) We will continue “Caught Being Good” and “PBIS” incentives to reward students for exhibiting responsible and respectful behavior. Students and Parents September 2018 – June 2019 Administration, support staff, dean and teachers, parents Student Support Service Team (SSST) will meet monthly with administration, support staff and teachers to review “at risk” students’ behavior and make recommendations Students and Parents September 2018 – June 2019 Administration, support staff, dean and teachers We will continue our partnership with CBOs such as Mental Health, New York Edge (SBO) and Mobile Response Team (MRT) to expand on services that support students’ social and emotional growth. To help address parental needs and concerns, families will be invited to the school to participate in activities intended to train them in how to support their children’s academic, social, and emotional needs. Parents will also be invited in on an as needed basis to participate in meetings directly involving their children’s needs. ..We will partner with continue our partnership with the in house SAPIS counselor Students and Parents September 2018 – June 2019 Administration, support staff, dean and teachers students parents October 2018-June 2019 admin, teachers, parents 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. The parent coordinator will offer various workshops and strategies they can use at home to support their children's social and emotional Partnership with the Mobile Response Team to offer family support Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 22  Budget resources include paying for absent for our Per Diem substitutes using human resources, as well as schedule adjustments for the 2018-2019 school year. We will fund additional per diem guidance counselors in order to support our mandated students and students at risk (as needed) Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Tax Levy X Title I SWP X Title I TA Title I 1003(a) Title III PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, students will demonstrate a sense of ownership of their socio-emotional growth via the use of Therapeutic Crisis Intervention Services (TCIS) and Restorative Justice Practices, whereas 40% of all students will make 1 year’s growth as measured by Degrees of Reading Power (DRP) levels. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Degrees of Reading Power (DRP) OORS reports Attendance reports Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 23  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 4 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 4.2 School and teacher leaders ensure that instructional practices and strategies are organized around annual, unit, and daily lesson plans that address all student goals and needs. 4.3 Teachers provide coherent, and appropriately aligned Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS)-based instruction that leads to multiple points of access for all students. 4.4 Teachers and students work together to implement a program/plan to create a learning environment that is responsive to students’ varied experiences and tailored to the strengths and needs of all students. SOP(s) Addressed x 4.5 Teachers inform planning and foster student participation in their own learning process by using a variety of summative and formative data sources (e.g., screening, interim measures, and progress monitoring). Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. X 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. According to our most recent Quality Review Report which conducted in March of 2017 “The majority of teachers engaged in inquiry based collaborative sessions where they consistently analyzed student work and analyze data toward meeting school wide goals and implementing the instructional shifts.” Though teachers consistently meet to collaboratively analyze student work and to develop action plans that are responsive to student needs, a review of formal and informal observational data revealed that several teachers continue to struggle with implementing strategies effectively address the needs of all students, specifically ELLs, SWDs and students in the lowest third (a specific targeted population) Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, teacher teams representing all subjects and grade levels will conduct weekly meetings that follow scheduled activities inclusive of inquiry and protocols to discuss, develop, and implement intervention plans to address students’ needs, in alignment with the school’s updated behavior plan, and promote improved teacher practice as 2018-19 SCEP-FF 24 evidenced by 75% of general education students will make 1 year’s growth of reading gains and SWDs make 2/3 of a year’s growth as measured by Degrees of Reading Power (DRP) levels. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 25  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Administrators and Teachers September 2018 – June 2019 Administration We will conduct instructional rounds, collaborative learning walks as a part of our on-going professional learning activities in order to promote continuous pedagogical improvement. We will provide professional development designed to support teachers with planning strategies that effectively address identified of student need. Administrators and Teachers Supervisors will closely monitor lesson and unit plans to ensure that they include scaffolds, supports and strategies to adequately address the needs of their diverse student population. After a review of these artifacts teachers will receive timely feedback Administrators and Teachers Administration Administration September 2018 – June 2019 September 2018 – June 2019 To ensure that parents are involved in the process of understanding how their children are performing in all core subject areas, members of each core subject teacher team will discuss which parents need to be invited in to the school, called, emailed, etc. in order to discuss their child’s performance and the ways in which they can support their child at home. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Administrators and Teachers September 2018 – June 2019 Administration How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Using Skedula and Class dojo as a means of effectively communicating with parents. Parents will receive progress reports and individualized letters about their child's progress a minimum of four times during the year. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 26  Fair Student Funding will be used to conduct instructional rounds, collaborative learning walks as a part of our on-going professional learning activities in order to promote continuous pedagogical improvement. SWP Funding will be used to provide professional development designed to support teachers with planning strategies that effectively address identified of student needs. Fair Student Funding will be used closely monitor lesson and unit plans to ensure that they include scaffolds, supports and strategies to adequately address the needs of their diverse student population. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) Title I SWP X Title I TA Title III PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant X 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, teacher teams representing all subjects and grade levels will conduct weekly meetings that follow scheduled activities inclusive of inquiry and protocols to discuss, develop, and implement intervention plans to address students’ needs, in alignment with the school’s updated behavior plan, and promote improved teacher practice as evidenced by 40% of general education students will make 1 year’s growth of reading gains and SWDs make 1/3 of a year’s growth as measured by Degrees of Reading Power (DRP) levels. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Degrees of Reading Power (DRP) Progress reports Modified lesson plans Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 27  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 2 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 2.2 The school leader ensures that the school community shares the Specific, Measurable, Ambitious, Results-oriented, and Timely (SMART) goals/mission and long-term vision inclusive of core values that address the priorities outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP). Leaders make strategic decisions to organize programmatic, human, and fiscal capital resources. x 2.3 2.4 The school leader has a fully functional system in place aligned to the district's Annual Professional Performance Review (APPR) to conduct targeted and frequent observation and track progress of teacher practices based on student data and feedback. 2.5 Leaders effectively use evidence-based systems and structures to examine and improve critical individual and school-wide practices as defined in the SCEP (student achievement, curriculum and teacher practices; leadership development; community/family engagement; and student social and emotional developmental health). SOP(s) Addressed Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Results of our most recent Quality Review conducted in March 2017, revealed that “Across classrooms, grades, and subjects used and create assessments, common assessments and rubrics aligned to the curricula to determine student progress towards goals.” Despite these strengths in our practices, discussions at our most recent professional development day revealed there is still a need for teachers to refine their ability to use data, and develop effective plans that are responsive to individual student needs Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART– Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 28  By June 2019, administrators and teacher leaders will collaborate weekly to develop, monitor and improve a meaningful cycle of professional development which builds teachers’ capacity, supports the intentional design and delivery of rigorous instruction as well as promote the ability to support and elevate students’ socio-emotional development as evidenced by 75% of general education students will make 1 year’s growth of reading gains and SWDs make 2/3 of a year’s growth as measured by Degrees of Reading Power (DRP) levels. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 29  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) ***Focus on school leadership.**** Teachers Administration September 2018– June 2019 Each month, as a part of their weekly cycle of activities, teacher teams will be required to analyze student work products and the results of their most recent common assessments. The administration will continue to monitor teacher team outcomes by reviewing student, class and grade wide data on a monthly basis. We will continue to provide professional development on how to use research-based protocols, like the “Surfacing the Gaps Protocol” to analyze student wok and on how to develop unit and lesson plans that are responsive to student needs, based on the frequent collection and analysis of student assessment data. Teachers We will provide timely feedback, which includes information on how to improve outcomes for students, based on the findings from formal and informal observations conducted. Teachers To ensure that parents are apprised of and involved in the process of supporting their children with achieving the grade level expectations of the CCLS, we will use our new online program, “Skedula” to upload information relative to their children’s grades, progress, attendance, and anecdotal information. There is also a place within the program for teachers and parents to engage in ongoing communication about how their children are performing and the ways their parents can support them at home. Parents and Students 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Administration Administration Administration September 2018 – June 2019 September 2018– June 2019 September 2018 – June 2019 How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. The parent coordinator will inform parents that they can have access to every teachers rating and can discuss the various types of Professional Development that is being offered to pedagogy Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment 2018-19 SCEP-FF 30  Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Fair Student Funding will be used for after school activities that to analyze student work products and the results of their most recent common assessments after the required OPW allotment of time. Fair Student Funding and Title 1 Funding will be used for to ensure that parents are apprised of and involved in the process of supporting their children with achieving the grade level expectations of the CCLS, we will use our new online program, “Skedula” to upload information relative to their children’s grades, progress, attendance, and anecdotal information. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) Title I SWP X Title I TA Title III PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant X 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, administrators and teacher leaders will collaborate weekly to develop, monitor and improve a meaningful cycle of professional development which builds teachers’ capacity, supports the intentional design and delivery of rigorous instruction as well as promote the ability to support and elevate students’ socio-emotional development as evidenced by 40% of general education students will make 1 year’s growth of reading gains and SWDs make 1/3 of a year’s growth as measured by Degrees of Reading Power (DRP) levels. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. The instrument of measure that is used to review progress would be teacher team artifacts. We also adjust the plan as needed and identify goals with priority needs. We also develop strategies that will help promote effective goals. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 31  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 6 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 6.2 The school leader ensures that regular communication with students and families fosters their high expectations for student academic achievement. 6.3 The school engages in effective planning and reciprocal communication with family and community stakeholders so that student strength and needs are identified and used to augment learning. 6.4 The school community partners with families and community agencies to promote and provide training across all areas (academic and social and emotional developmental health) to support student success. 6.5 The school shares data in a way that promotes dialogue among parents, students, and school community members centered on student learning and success and encourages and empowers families to understand and use data to advocate for appropriate support services for their children. X X SOP(s) Addressed Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Results of our most recent Quality Review in March 2017, our parents stated that teachers communicate consistently regarding their child’s progress towards goals, alerting them if their child has excelled or fallen behind and needs extra help. Parents stated that although teachers have different methods, each is consist in their communication. In order to continue to improve parents understanding of their children’s performance and areas for improvement we will effectively communicate students' progress and action plans for improvement Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, administrators and the parent coordinator will collaborate to provide monthly events for families which will support students with socio-emotional care strategies in the home environment, and provide strategies for fostering a strong reading culture resulting in the strengthening of the home/school partnership as measured by 75% of general 2018-19 SCEP-FF 32 education students will make 1 year’s growth of reading gains and SWDs make 2/3 of a year’s growth as measured by Degrees of Reading Power (DRP) levels. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 33  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) We will conduct parent workshops to train them how to log on and utilize and interpret the information available on Skedula. Parents We will train the students on how to access and utilize Skedula via Pupil Path. Parents The Parent Coordinator and or Administration will conduct monthly workshops with parents to inform them of changes in academia, school policies and regulations. Parents We will continue to train teachers and staff on how to access, utilize and implement Skedula to best support their students and inform parents. Teachers, Support Staff September 2018 – June 2019 September 2018 – June 2019 September 2018 – June 2019 September 2018 – June 2019 Administration, Skedula Point Person Administration, Skedula Point Person Administration, Skedula Point Person Administration, Skedula Point Person 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. Sports and Arts in Schools Foundation (SASF) The Mobile Response Team (MRT) Brooklyn Connections Central Brooklyn MLK Commission Design2Learn Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Skedula program, Trainer (if needed) Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Tax Levy Title I SWP X Title I TA P/F Set-aside X 21st Century C4E 2018-19 SCEP-FF 34  Title I 1003(a) Title III PTA Funded SIG Grant School Achievement Other Funding Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. .By February 2019, administrators and the parent coordinator will collaborate to provide monthly events for families which will support students with socio-emotional care strategies in the home environment, and provide strategies for fostering a strong reading culture resulting in the strengthening of the home/school partnership as measured by 40% of general education students will make 1 year’s growth of reading gains and SWDs make 1/3 of a year’s growth as measured by Degrees of Reading Power (DRP) levels. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. The instruction of measure that will be used to assess progress would be to review teachers artifacts and observation feedback and rating to ensure impact on teacher practice. Data is also reviewed in February to determine of we are showing progress in achieving our goal. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 35  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Mathematics Science Social Studies At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) ELLS, SWD, Lowest Third, Marking Period Grades , Teacher Recommendation ELLS, SWD, Lowest Third, Marking Period Grades , Teacher Recommendation ELLS, SWD, Lowest Third, Marking Period Grades , Teacher Recommendation ELLS, SWD, Lowest Third, Marking Period Grades , Teacher Recommendation ELLS, SWD, Lowest Third, Marking Period Grades , Teacher Recommendation Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Achieve 3000, Reading Comprehension, Ready New York CCLS, 6+1 Traits and Strategies for Writers Brain-Pop, Computation, Problem Solving, Open-ended Questions, Short Responses, and Test Prep Brain-Pop, Special Projects and Science Fairs Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) Small Group and Individual Small Group and Individual When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) During the morning, during the school day, after-school, Saturdays, and spring vacation During the morning, during the school day, after-school, Saturdays, and spring vacation Small Group and Individual During the school day DBQs, Projects and Brain-Pop Small Group and Individual During the school day Counseling, PBIS and Student “Rap” Sessions Small Group and Individual During the school day 2018-19 SCEP-FF 36  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) We currently have 75 students in temporary housing. 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. 1. Our schools MS 61 provides many services for students in temporary housing. Our school holds, Coat Drives, Clothing drive. We also provide school supplies, evening snacks and additional after school tutoring and academic support. We also provide counseling and other interventions. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 37  N/A 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. N/A 2018-19 SCEP-FF 38  Section 8: Title I Program Information Directions:  All schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. *****Response should address recruitment, retention, assignment and asupport for teachers to become highly qualified.************* The school holds teacher team meetings to monitored by administrators to provide support. Quality professional development sessions are provided for teacher support. Our school also holds Department Meeting. Lunch and Learn, Inter-visitation of Schools, and Faculty Retreats. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the strategies and activities for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, staff, and paraprofessionals that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). ****Describe rather than list strategies and activities**** Teacher Team Meetings Monitored by Administrators Faculty Conferences Department Meeting Lunch and Learn 2018-19 SCEP-FF 39  Inter-visitation of Schools Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/information, early intervention services, etc.). N/A 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. ****Include information about teacher teams and instructional leadership team.***** The systems/structures rely on multiple pre-assessment and post-assessments, professional development meetings are held to discuss the use of assessments and their results. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds enables, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (SCEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the 2018-19 SCEP-FF 40  Title I Part A (Basic) Federal Title I School Improvement 1003(a) Federal Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funds Federal Title II, Part A Federal Title III, Part A Federal Title III, Immigrant Federal $177,711.00 $129,000.00 $11,200.00 Tax Levy (FSF) Local $3,800,000.00 amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) X X X X Column B Section Reference(s) Smaller classrooms, team teachers, more books for students, more instructional materials. Smaller classrooms, team teachers, more books for students, more instructional materials. NYSESLAT preparation,afterschool, teacher perdiem, Parent workshops participation. Salaries, books and supplies. 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used 2018-19 SCEP-FF 41  conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I School Improvement 1003(a): To support implementation of school improvement activities identified through the Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) reviews or a school review with district oversight and included in the DCIP/SCEP.  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: To support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs.  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan.  Title I Priority and Focus School Parent Engagement Set-aside: Additional set-aside is to enable greater and  more meaningful parent participation in the education of their children. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.  Grant funds awarded via a competitive process, including Title I 1003(g) SIG funds: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 42  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. M.S. 61, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Dr. Gladstone H. Atwell Ms61K will support parents and families of Title I students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; 2018-19 SCEP-FF 43  ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; The school’s Parent Involvement Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability grade-level curriculum and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, Progress Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in 2018-19 SCEP-FF 44  the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings, with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between /teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) School-Parent Compact (SPC) M.S. 61, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between 2018-19 SCEP-FF 45  the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; 2018-19 SCEP-FF 46  ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering will all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; 2018-19 SCEP-FF 47  II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; 2018-19 SCEP-FF 48  ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 49  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 2018-19 SCEP-FF 50  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: Getting Ready for NYSESLAT Readingworks Imagine Learning Light Sails At MS 61, there are 34 ELLS in the 6th/7th/8th grades. The Title III program will be held after school from 2:30pm-4:30pm (2 hours/day) and the sessions will take place 3x/week (2x3 hours=6 hours/week= 6 hours of instruction/week). The program will be operating for 23 weeks, it will start in November and end in May. The language of instruction will be English with native language support. As a result, each teacher has 2 sessions per day ( Wednesday, Thursday, and Friday ). Each student has a session of ELA and a session of math per day. One teacher is a certified common branch teacher. One Teacher is a Certified ENL Teacher these teachers are very knowledgeable in taking part in rigorous ENL methodologies and scaffolding strategies that are needed to teach ELLs in content areas. There are currently 10 Spanish, 2 Arabic, 1 French, 4 Fulani, 2 Bengali 2 Hungary and 25 Haitian Creole English language learners. The Title III program will be offered to all English language learners this will include ELLs who receive special education services. The supplemental materials that will be used are Getting Ready for the NYSESLAT, Readingworks and Imagine learning, Light sail will also be used. Translated texts will also be used when possible. Native language (NL) support will also be provided through the use of Bilingual dictionaries and glossaries which are available and encouraged. These materials are supplemental and distinct from those used for daily instruction. In Math , students facilitate in small groups based on the need to strengthen a particular skill area. Therefore, there are groups in which students who are learning beginning division (one digit) another is learning to divide fractions and mixed numbers; while other groups are solving problems with polynomial. Expanding students will concentrate on algebra, geometry, skills using angles and estimation. Textbooks are "Go Math" teacher generated worksheets; and computer generated materials. ELA sessions will use reading selections from reading works.org modified with strategies to help English Language Learners obtain proficiency in the NYSESLAT exam . Teachers focus on the basic grammar, linking ideas and translating these images into words (writing). Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered 2018-19 SCEP-FF 51  Part C: Professional Development Begin description here: The Title III program will be offered to all English language learners this will include ELLs who receive special education services. The supplemental materials that will be used are Getting Ready for the NYSESLAT, Readingworks, Light sail and Imagine learning will also be used. Translated texts will also be used when possible. Native language (NL) support will also be provided through the use of Bilingual dictionaries and glossaries which are available and encouraged. These materials are supplemental and distinct from those used for daily instruction. In Math , students facilitate in small groups based on the need to strengthen a particular skill area. Therefore, there are groups in which students who are learning beginning division (one digit) another is learning to divide fractions and mixed numbers; while other groups are solving problems with polynomial. Expanding students will concentrate on algebra, geometry, skills using angles and estimation. Textbooks are "Go Math" teacher generated worksheets; and computer generated materials. Professional Development Title III Supplemental instruction Program Provider: Eliaser Noesi November 13th 2018 Duration 2:30PM to 3:30PM Topics: *NYSESLAT Preparation Guide *ELA Roadworks *Math Engage NY/Khan Academy ELA sessions will use reading selections from reading works.org modified with strategies to help English Language Learners obtain proficiency in the NYSESLAT exam . Teachers focus on the basic grammar, linking ideas and translating these images into words (writing). Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: Rationale for these parent workshops are provided to educate parents on how to assist their English language learner with their homework assignments. Notification letters will be sent home prior to parent engagement activities, workshops and meetings take place. One hour workshops will include: Math for ELLS: What instructional scaffolding you need to know to support your English language learner in math. this workshop will take place November 14th 2018 2:30-3:30 pm 2018-19 SCEP-FF 52 Part D: Parental Engagement Activities ELA for ELLS: What Methods Work Best for ELLs: Effective Academic language for ELLs General: Testing/Graduation and ELL Promotional Policies. This parent workshop will take place November 21th 2018 from 2:30-4:30 pm Notifications of events will be translated in the parents preferred language. Records, agendas, attendance sheets will be stored in the Principals office. January 8th 2:30-3:30 pm 2019 Strategies for helping your English Language Learner obtain proficiency on the NYSESLAT exam. Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits)  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 53  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 17 School Name Dr. Gladstone H. Atwell Middle School 61 Borough Brooklyn School Number 061 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Dewana Daids Coach na ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Eliaser Noesi Teacher/Subject Area Angela Newball, World Language Teacher/Subject Area na Related-Service Provider Ladesha Gill-Bey, Speech Provi Superintendent Clarence Ellis Assistant Principal Ms. Adriana Galvan Coach na School Counselor Ms. Jean Morant Parent Joanne Trellis, PA Parent Coordinator Ms. Aileene Thompson Field Support Center Staff Member Marie Bastien Other (Name and Title) type here C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 0 1 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 1 2 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics 2018-19 SCEP-FF 54  Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 736 Total number of ELLs 44 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 5.98% Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 1 4 3 2 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? As a middle school, the initial assessment tool that assesses the ELL's literacy skills is the NYSESLAT Mock Baseline & NYSESLAT Mock Benchmark, these diagnostics are given in the fall and spring as pre and post assessments to monitor student progress. These tests reveal the students' strengths and weaknesses in the language acquisition of English. As a result, the curriculum is modified to include scaffolds and supports in order to meet the particular needs of our ENL population. The ELA and math curricula include pre and post assessments that are based in standards for each particular subject. Students review their pre and post data, reflect and make next step plans for improvement. Additionally teachers review student data and make adjustments in the curriculum to support their needs. In March, students take predictive assessments which indicate how students will perform on the actual ELA exam. The scores of the ESL periodic assessments are also used to guide instruction and offer further support in specific areas. For the 2018 -2019 Middle School 61 will be using the TCRWP in addition to DRP 2018-19 SCEP-FF 55  reading levels which will guide instructional planning for our ELLs. Our teachers will be trained in MSQI, Middle School Quality Initiative which prepares teachers to collectively implement and refine a set of research based adolescent literacy practices. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? Our teachers will meet as subject and grade teams alongside our ENL and Special Education teachers during curriculum planning and data review to ensure that the specific needs of out ENL population are being addressed. For the 2018-2019 school year ELA and Math teachers are registered for MSQI summer session training to prepare them for the upcoming school year and expose them to strategies and techniques that are researched based which can be utilized in the classroom to support our ENL students. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? As a middle school, the initial assessment tool that assesses the ELL's literacy skills is the NYSESLAT Mock Baseline & NYSESLAT Mock Benchmark, these diagnostics are given in the fall and spring as pre and post assessments to monitor student progress. These tests reveal the students' strengths and weaknesses in the language acquisition of English. As a result, the curriculum is modified to include scaffolds and supports in order to meet the particular needs of our ENL population. Our school will also introduce the data collection of prerequisite assessments that will be done prior to the start of a lesson. This information will be used for grouping and planning for students who may need special support. End unit assessments will then be administered and used to monitor progress for specific strands in math and standards in ELA and writing. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? M.S. 61 is departmentalized by subject and has created teacher teams. These teams are composed of special education, general education teachers along with the ENL teacher. The teams follow a structured cycle that allows for specific time to be spent reviewing student data. The outcome of these reviews allows for updating, modifying and adjusting the curriculum to meet the needs of our students. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] N/A 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. As a middle school, we will use the NYSESLAT, NYSITELL, DRP, running records, and the I-ready are used to evaluate the ELLs’ level of literacy. Over the past few years, most students who take the NYSITELL are new students to the English language school system. As newcomers, they usually score a at the "Entering Level" However, a minority of the students studied English in their native country or had spent summers in the US, and learned some social English and/or some academic English. The students who came for social visits often score an “Emerging" They have some listening and speaking skills. However, the few who studied English in their native countries often score a Transitioning Level on the NYSESLAT.. Students who are found to require more support are placed in specific classes so that the ENL teacher can do integrated ENL in the classroom. On the converse students who have shown progress are scheduled for advanced regents classes and are given the opportunity to take the regents. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? The data that is gleaned from the NYSESLAT, reading running records, DRP scores and I-Ready reports are shared out to all teachers. The ENL teacher keeps records of this data and also assists in monitoring progress. Teacher Teams meet weekly and follow a cycle that includes the review of the data of ENL students and make adjustments to the curriculum assessments and lesson plans as needed. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 56  Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. A./B. Programming and scheduling information: MS 61 is a middle school, and most of the programming is based on the departmentalization. The ENL program is a combination of integrated ENL and stand alone models. When the ENL teacher does integrated ENL, he will alternate between team teaching and working separately with the ELL groups. Based on schedule and student needs, the stand alone model is used. When possible , these groups are formed by grade and linguistic levels. b. TBE program. If applicable. na c. DL program. If applicable. na 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? Most of the 6th, 7th and 8th grade ELLs are in one class. This also allows for the integrated ENL to be implemented. Some ELLs/Entering and Emerging ELLS have individual schedules that meet their specific needs. Entering and Emerging ELLs usually participate in the stand alone model during ELA/social studies classes, and/or minor classes and work in small groups or individually. ELLS are not pulled out of any math class. All students receive their mandated minutes of ENL services. According to CR Part 154: ENL Services: Entering/Beginners/Emerging/low Intermediates – 180 minutes of stand-alone ENL and 180 minutes integrated ENL/ELA. Transitioning/intermediates-180 minutes/week Expanding/advanced – 180 minutes/week Expanding ELL’s receive a minimum of ELA -180 minutes/week) based on class program) Commanding ELL's will continue to receive 90 minutes/week 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. Core content area is delivered for ENL students by integrating supplemental materials and providing the proper scaffolding based on level. Sentence starters, sentence frames, transitional word and visual pictures are used in ELA. Additionally leveled readers, bilingual dictionaries/glossaries/ and translated textbooks(where available) are used throughout all other subjects. Material is translated into Haitian Creole, Spanish/Arabic,French.etc. Note: all teachers of ENLs are encouraged to have bilingual dictionaries and other forms of NL(native language) support in individual classrooms as per specific language and ENL level. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? 2018-19 SCEP-FF 57  To ensure that ELLS are appropriately evaluated in their native language throughout the year they are provided with native language support. Classroom libraries, multilingual books, resources, dictionaries/glossaries are afforded to them. ESL Methods incorporate QTEL/CALLA/ scaffolding/stress on academic English with use of appropriate graphic organizers, Spanish speaking ELL’s take the Spanish LAB to ascertain NL literacy. There are no equivalent standardized tests in Haitian Creole or Arabic. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status The present program for SIFE students includes a stronger targeted academic shelter instruction. SIFE requires specialized supports to build competencies in English and/or native language literacy, and content areas where subject matter was missed. AIS services are administered to SIFE students three times a week in a small group. Imagine Learning and I-ready are two online programs that are used to support the ELLs and SIFE students. Both programs target reading, writing, speaking and listening. Students who have been in an English language system for 0-3 years need intensive ENL. Although most of these students are mandated to receive 360 minutes/week, the newest students receive more services based on teacher and student schedule. Beginner and Intermediate students have exposure to the English language using a variety of strategies including visuals, repetition, graphic organizers appropriate for various skills/strategies and Total Physical Response (TPR). Two specific strategies utilized are the CALLA (Cognitive Academic Language Approach) and CALPS (Cognitive Academic Language Proficiency Skills). These along with other strategies are used to develop natural English language acquisition. For students who are long term ELLs , their performance is analyzed by their classroom teacher in conjunction with their ENL provider to decide if there is a problem other than language that might be delaying their progress in language acquisition. After three years of service, these students are eligible for an extension of services which entitles them to continue to receive services. ELLs also participate in after school programs which supplement the core curriculum and our mandated ESL program. We will use our Title III money to give our long term ELLs additional opportunities to acquire the English language as well as expose them to test sophistication strategies to better prepare them to meet the Common Core Standards as measured by city and state standardized exams. For ELLs who are at risk, or who have been retained in grade, summer school is provided through Tax Levy ELL monies. After attaining proficiency level on NYSESLAT the student receives an additional 2 years of ENL services if he or she is in the 6th grade, and 7th grade students receive 1 year of additional services, since our school only goes up to the 8th grade. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? Special SWD ELLS receive all modifications stated on their IEP’s. ENL teacher have an updated IEP on file. In order for Spec Ed ELLs to master grade level material, ENL teacher will differentiate material; provide scaffolded instruction; provide leveled activities; provide ENL methodologies as chunking/jigsawing/ Think-Pair-Share/accountable talk/use of cognates. To ensure that ELLS are appropriately evaluated in their native language throughout the year they are provided with native language support. Classroom libraries, multilingual books, resources, dictionaries/glossaries are afforded to them. Presently for ELA we are utilizing CODE-X. CODE-X is Common Core aligned and includes differentiation instructions for SWDs and ELLs in grades 6-8. For the 2018 -2019 school year our 6th grade will be using TCRWP , 7th grade will use CodeX and the TC writing program and 8th grade non regents classes will use CodeX along with the TC writing and regents class students will use Engage New York Grade 9 modules. Our ELLs are also benefiting from our math program , GoMath which also includes modifications and strategies for SWDs and ELLs in grades 6-8 students. In Addition, we utilize supplemental reading programs through the use of technology which includes, Imagine Learning, and Light Sail. Imagine Learning an online reading program has an initial assessment for all ELLS and creates lessons based on each individual student’s pre- assessment results. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 58  7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? The service providers (speech, occupational therapy, ELL, and guidance) work together before the start of the school year to coordinate their schedules to accommodate the students I.E.P. mandates and mandated ELL minutes. All services are implemented in the least restrictive environment in either a push in or pull-out model. We currently have I.C.T. classes across grades that service children in the least restrictive environment. Our school differentiates instruction for all students including ELLs. Constant analysis of data will inform all decisions in regards to changes in instruction and specific intervention programs. As mentioned above, the use of technology is used to scaffold instruction and provide content vocabulary and prior knowledge. Our school uses the CODE_X ELA program which contains a component specifically targeted for ELL students as well as the TCRWP. Students (including ELLs) are all aware of their current independent reading levels, participate in guided reading work (with the classroom, and/or ELL teacher) on one level higher text, and they are all aware of the level that they need to achieve in order to successfully complete the grade and their goals. Once a student is determined to qualify for mainstreaming they are mainstreamed into the subject they perform best in. ELLs and students are also mainstreamed throughout lunch, recess and physical education. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. Classroom as well as the ENL teachers use the data from these assessments to strategically plan lessons, and activities to drive students' instruction. Our current online program, Imagine Learning Offers resources and supports based on the individual need of each student. Vocabulary Workshop is another online program used to support targeted ELLs. Both programs assess students on where they are and has ongoing assessments after skills are taught. Grammar Workshop is a program we use to target those students who need further support in writing. Light Sail, Imagine Learning and Vocabulary Workshop all assess students at their level and work from their levels building skills. Let's Target is a program that we use to enhance effective use of vocabulary across multiple content areas. All of the programs increase strategies for building and applying vocabulary in reading, writing, speaking and listening. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? • Expanded bilingual classroom libraries • Expanded bilingual material for school library • More home language support as bilingual dictionaries in all ELL classrooms * Implementation of Online programs within the classroom 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? The number of student enrollment to maintain the program decreased. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. All ELLs and former ELLS can participate in school-wide programs as Extended Day, after school a Sports and Arts in School foundation program. Additional services in Math and ELA are available for all ELLs during lunch and learns and after-school. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. *Imagine Leaning targets the four modalities; reading, writing, listening and speaking •CODE_X is a supplementary program that challenges students to read, think, analyze, question, cite evidence, debate, and write every day. Code X was built specifically to address the rigorous demands of the Common Core State Standards. CODE-X has lessons that specifically target the ELL population in our school. Teachers College Writing workshop is a program that works to different methods of flexibility during one on one conferences to help remediate and address specific needs. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 59  *Go Math program includes a component for ESL students. •Holt McDougal’s United States History and New York History Beginnings to 1877 along with Eastern Hemisphere are the texts use to drive Social Studies instruction. The teachers use the online component to supplement lessons. •Glencoe Science textbook New York Science is used across the grades during science instruction. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Assessment in home language is done when students enter program. Teachers then work collaboratively with the ENL teacher to modify curriculum and create supports. Home Language support is delivered though the use of cognates, home language vocabulary with target language vocabulary, bilingual dictionaries, and glossaries. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. Our ELL student's are grouped based their levels Entering, Emerging, Transitioning, Expanding or Commanding . Age appropriate and Common Core resources are used with each grade. Students are provided with the proper scaffold support provided by the Bilingual Common core Progressions. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? na 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). We do not currently have a program that assists newly enrolled ELL students before the beginning of the school year. If an ELL student enrolls during the school year, the student will be placed in the ENL program, instructions will be given to the student using Imagine Learning, i-ready, Vocabulary Workshop New York Edition, Sadlier phonics digital resources. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? We are currently offering Spanish, French, Italian and American Sign Language to ELLS. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? N/A Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? ENL teachers will attend ongoing workshops/PD provided by The Department of Education as well as other providers. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 60  Teachers are familiar with ENL methodology in the classroom.. In turn, Mr. Noesi, the ENL Coordinator will provide turn-key workshops/PDs to the various teachers of ELLs and other staff members through Data Inquiry Team meeting, Common Preps, Professional Development Days, etc. These sessions will be held on a bi-monthly basis for common prep periods for grades 6th/7th/8th. Data Inquiry, morning PD sessions, etc are held once per quarter. Attendance and agendas are kept on file. Individual congruence sessions are by mutual appointment between teachers and ENL. These sessions will cover various topics based on the needs of specific teachers/students.Topics will include: *BICs and CALP *ELL testing modifications *Academic English for ELLs *Effective Graphic organizers for ELLs Four Modalities of Language *Language Acquisitions *NYSITELL, ELL periodic Assessment, and NYSESLAT (Operational Test and Field Test) *Language Acquistion *LAB-R Spanish, ELL periodic Assessment and NYSESLAT (Operational Test and Field Test) *Hands on QTEL methodologies and Strategies *Scaffolding for ELLs *Tiered Vocabulary for ELLs April 8th, Testing tips for ELLs; May 6, NYSESLAT format. The ENL pedagogue attends professional development workshops throughout the school year. These workshops are geared to increase the teacher’s toolbox of ENL strategies and provided by the both the network and Department of ELLs as a middle school we ensure that our students are prepared and knowledgeable about the transitioning to high school. We make sure that all letters sent home regarding the application process are available in appropriate languages. We also have both a curriculum orientation and meetings for parents offering information about the transitions process. When needed we utilize the Translation Services made available by the Department of Education. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? Our school provides ongoing parent engagement meetings to discuss students goals and their progress toward achieving academic success. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Our school tries to hold ongoing ELL workshops for parents. Agendas and attendance are kept on file for review. We also infuse ENL strategies in all of our curriculum maps for scaffold use. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 61  2018-19 SCEP-FF 62 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Dewana Daids, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 63  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: Dr. Gladstone H. Atwell School DBN: 17K061 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Dewana Daids Title Principal Adriana Galvan Assistant Principal Aileen Thompson Parent Coordinator Eliaser Noesi ENL/Bilingual Teacher Parent Teacher/Subject Area Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach School Counselor Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member . Other . Other . Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 5/22/18 5/22/18 5/22/18 5/22/18 . 2018-19 SCEP-FF 64  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 17k061 School Name: Dr. Gladstone H. Atwell MS 61 Superintendent: ClarenceEllis The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No (*Primary) Adriana Eliaser Galvan Noesi Assistant Principal ENL Teacher Yes Yes Yes Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. Upon entry into our school parents are greeted by our Multilingual Welcome and Achieve NYC posters to remind parents that our school can assist them in their language. The language Identification Guide is used by our staff to identify the language of a limited English proficient parent. This guide is displayed both at the security desk for entering parents and in the main office for visiting parents. Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 establishes procedures for ensuring that LEP parents are provided with a meaningful opportunity to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education to support this endeavour we at MS 61 ensure that registration is done by qualified personnel must be available to determine if a language other than English is spoken at home. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 65  After registration and enrollment in MS 61 , the Home Language Questionnaire (HLQ) is completed by the parent/guardian. However, districts may create their own form for diagnostic assessment of a prospective enrollee’s linguistic needs, incorporating questions 1-7 on the HLQ, and distribute at any time, including prior to enrollment. Languages are recorded into ATS. According to Language preference in ATS emergency Contact Cards are available in Spanish, Haitian Creole and Arabic. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Oral Percent English Haitian Creole Spanish Arabic French Housa Bengali Portuguese Polish Fulani 943 89.21 939 56 27 7 6 1 6 1 2 4 5.3 2.55 .66 .57 .09 .57 .09 .19 .38 57 28 7 4 1 7 1 2 7 88.84 5.39 2.65 .66 .38 .09 .66 .09 .19 .66 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. N/A Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 2018-19 SCEP-FF 66  1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency How do you Distributed to plan to Families The documents disseminated every year that require translation include a school calendar, trip slips, notifications, letters, and other forms of written communication. Ongoing Basis as needed translate? Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. Utilize on site translated copies of monthly events to be updated and reused. Translated requests will be sent out to the Office Of Translation and Interpretation Unit one month in advance of date needed. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide Middle School Parent Conference September 20, 2018 Parent Teacher Conference November 27-28th 2018 interpretation service(s)? Utilize bilingual staff Print our translation versions of parent information. Identified staff will wear labels stated they are interpreters and what language they speak. Utilize bilingual staff 2018-19 SCEP-FF 67  Parent Teacher Conference March 26 - 27th 2019 Parent Teacher Conference May 16, 2019 Print our translation versions of parent information. Disseminate Translated Report Cards Identified staff will wear labels stated they are interpreters and what language they speak. Utilize bilingual staff Utilize bilingual staff Print our translation versions of parent information. Disseminate Translated Report Cards Identified staff will wear labels stated they are interpreters and what language they speak. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. In the event of an emergency on site bilingual staff will contact the parents if none are available a call will be made to the over the phone interpretation services to help translate in the parents native language. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Professional Development will be held at the start of the year to remind/introduce how to use the Translation and Interpretation Unit services. (This PD will be repeated through out the year as needed) Information packets will be given to the staff as a resouce of the information available through the T & I Unit. Every Staff member will receive an Email via DOE email with the link and number to the Translation and Interpretation unit. Contact number to the Translation and Interpretation Unit is posted in the main office. Large Print Parent information poster is also posted in the main office, parent coordinator’s room and main entrance. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 68  Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 establishes procedures for ensuring that LEP parents are provided with a meaningful opportunity to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education. We will continue to do the following: * Have notifications and parent letters will be translated by the Translation & Interpretation Unit/teachers/volunteers if not found at the Translation and interpretation Unit's intranet. *Will use available OELL translation of brochures, notifications, etc. * Notifications and parent letters will be translated by the Translation & Interpretation Unit/teachers/volunteers *Run RCPL for updates to Parents preferred languages *Survey school for bilingual staff Information organize the availability of these translators *School will contact Over the Phone Interpreter Services for standardized content area test if there is not a pedagogue available who can translate according to NYS Mandates. *Use of ATS Home language reports will indicate which different languages are spoken by the families of the entire student body. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? The school will conduct a meeting for parents inclusive of all cultures and languages and survey how they feel supported. The use of parent surveys will also be provided to gather feedback from parents on the quality and availability of services. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 69 
