2018-19 COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (CEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): School Name: 19K065 P.S. 065 Principal: DAYSI GARCIA 2018-19 CEP 1  Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 CEP 2  Section 1: School Information Page School Information School Name: Cesiah Toro Mullane School 331900010065 School Number (DBN): 19K065 BEDS Code: Grades Served: K-5 School Address: 700 Jamaica Avenue Phone Number: 718 235-2223 Fax: 718-235-2033 School Contact Person: DaysiGarcia Email Address: DGarcia8@schools.nyc.gov Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: Daysi Garcia Somnauth Narine Jessica Sanchez SLT Chairperson: Jacqueline Robateau Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Jessica Quiroz n/a n/a District Information Geographical District: 19 Superintendent: Dr. Thomas McBrydeJr Superintendent’s Office Address: 557 Pennsylvania Ave, Brooklyn, NY 11207 Superintendent’s Email Address: TMcbryde@schools.nyc.gov Phone Number: 718-240-2741 Fax: 718-240-2700 Field Support Center (FSC) FSC: Brooklyn Executive Director: Bernadette Fitzgerald Executive Director’s Office Address: 131 Livingston St., Brooklyn, 11201 Executive Director’s Email Address: Bfitzge2@schools .nyc.gov Phone Number: 718-935-3954 Fax: 718- 2018-19 CEP 3  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Daysi Garcia Somnauth Narine Jessica Sanchez Estella Arroyo Jessica Quiroz *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Mary Maraldo Christopher Santana Jacqueline Robateau Member/ Teacher Member/Teacher Member/Teacher Member/Teacher Member/Teacher Member/ Parent 2018-19 CEP 4  Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Member/Parent Member/Parent Member/Parent Member/ Member/ Member/ 2018-19 CEP 5  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with 2018-19 CEP 6  the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement 2018-19 CEP 7  Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Section 4: CEP Overview PS65 is committed and dedicated to educated all students in order to meet the academic, social, and emotional needs of our diverse learners. We will accomplish this by: Meeting students' academic needs at their level and compelling them to think critically through a productive struggle. Creating engaging, relatable, and challenging learning tasks and lesson plans. Providing students with innovative and creative instructional resources to support them in their learning. Providing students with the knowledge and skills to become independent thinkers, learners, and conversationalists. 2018-19 CEP 8  Creating a learning environment that is conducive to high levels of student achievement and the development of positive relationships. Allowing the opportunity as well as providing the tools and practice for students to express themselves through rich academic conversations. Differentiating instruction using the Universal Design for Learning to meet the needs of all of our learners. Providing the students with the knowledge and tools to become proficient readers and writers. Assisting students with their social and emotional needs. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. PS 65 is located in the Cypress Hills section of Brooklyn. It has a large enrollment of immigrant families, mostly from Dominican Republic, Guyana, Mexico and Hispanic South America. Generations of families from various backgrounds have contributed to the school’s rich history and culture. With each academic year comes an influx of children entering our school predominantly limited in English proficiency. Many of our children come from homes with working parents who earn low wages, where grandparents are the primary caretakers. We work diligently to provide an appropriate early childhood learning environment that meets the educational, social, and emotional needs of our students. We strive to provide an environment complete with appropriate materials and trained staff in order to develop early literacy in our children. Our child-centered learning environment promotes the development of critical thinking skills via authentic learning experiences and inquiry-based learning. We use authentic literature to develop literacy in all content areas and foster experiences that help children prepare for the next level of education. The children’s language and experiences are valued and utilized to develop self-esteem, new skills and concepts. In keeping with the school’s interdisciplinary approach to learning, school-wide and grade-wide learning focuses are established. We are committed to refining our Inquiry Based Learning Model throughout the grades. Our literature-based reading program which interweaves elements of ReadyGen and ENgageNY includes the use of fiction and non-fiction books, periodicals, primary sources and documents. We use EngageNY in Mathematics, Writers Workshop and Balanced Literacy integrated into Inquiry Based Studies. Our Science Program is driven by a hands-on, inquiry-based approach. We are broadening our work with performance-based learning and authentic assessments, as well as a focus on the Danielson Framework toward teacher effectiveness. We will continue to grow through self-reflection and continue more in-depth work in this initiative. P.S. 65K is a thriving educational community school, which provides a rigorous and differentiated curriculum for all of its students in order to prepare them for career and college readiness. This is attained through high quality discussions and expressing them in our ELA, math, science and social studies. Collaboration is a central theme in the cultural dynamics of our school. Teachers, support staff and administrators work together to provide students with enriching and challenging instruction. School leaders and faculty have immersed themselves in understanding all aspects and implications of teaching the Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS). Their efforts are manifested in refined units of study targeting writing and math reasoning that are aligned to Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS) expectations in all subjects. Grade level teams are ambitious in curriculum mapping that include units of study with rigorous guiding questions, benchmark skills, lesson alignment, and assessment evidence. Vocabulary, differentiated instructional strategies through tiered tasks, and resources are added features to ensure attention to the needs of the large population of English as a New Language (ENL’s), Students With Disabilities (SWD’s), and those challenged by specific skill deficits. School leaders and faculty are collectively responsible for collecting, analyzing and sharing data. Data is used to drive instruction and differentiate lessons to meet the specific needs of individual students. In order to provide a diverse learning experience for our students, we maintain healthy working relationships with our parents, families and community members. At PS 65K we take care of the socio-emotional development of all our students by: making learning relevant, helping students to establish positive peer relationships, teaching behavior management skills, and aiding in their recognition of ability by setting high expectations for all of our students. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. 2018-19 CEP 9  To meet the needs of the large population of English as a New Language (ENL’s), Students With Disabilities (SWD’s), and those challenged by specific skill deficits, vocabulary, differentiated instructional strategies through tiered tasks, academic intervention services through SETTS, and resources are added features to ensure attention to the needs of our learners. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. As part of our effort to provide students with new and challenging learning experiences, we are creating a personalized literacy program that fits the needs of our student learners through interweaving elements of two existing programs - ReadyGen and EngageNY. We believe that providing higher tier learners with academics that stimulate the intellect at a pace appropriate to the learner will allow students to continue to grow academically. Students will be provided with resources that are academically aligned versus age aligned. While our ultimate goal is improving student achievement through engagement, we understand that it is important that we meet the social and emotional needs of students. Our commitment to fulfilling the Chancellor's initiative of second grade students reading on grade level is evident through our focus on creating professional development opportunities for teachers to ensure that students are using academic language. Additionally, teachers will meet weekly to discuss best practices to develop learning opportunities in classrooms where there is a gradual release of responsibility from the teacher. Professional development opportunities for teachers will be differentiated based on their Measure of Teacher Performance rating the prior year. Teachers will receive an individualized professional development program that is catered to enhance their strengths and improve upon their deficiencies. This will allow teachers to hone their craft and deliver instruction that provides an optimum learning experience for their students. Review of data from standardized tests, portfolios and classroom performance, particularly reading tests, indicate that the 5th grade has difficulty in meeting state standards and scored below the other grades of the school. Based on our assessments of students who are in the fifth grade, our fifth grade will need additional support, particularly in relation to the fifth grade Standards in Reading and Math and what they need to learn in order to perform well on the State Standardized Tests. We need to focus on students who do not make sufficient improvement by providing them with support services. We also need to boost all efforts in meeting the needs of at-risk students, including family outreach. An area that continues to be a major focus is increasing the level of parent involvement in all school activities. As a professional learning community, it is essential that we provide a multitude of collaborative opportunities between faculty and parents to plan for children's educational programs. Involving parents in all steps of their child's academic career will help to foster a love of learning from the child and increased support in the school community. It is crucial that we familiarize parents with the Common Core Standards, educational initiatives and school wide goals in meaningful and innovative ways. During Parent Engagement Sessions, each grade will continue to reach out to parents in small group sessions in order to form strong partnerships. 2018-19 CEP 10  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 19K065 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 0K,01,02,03,04,05 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 617 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 3 3 13 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 23 21 13 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 82.0% % Attendance Rate 81.4% % Reduced Lunch 23.0% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 2.9% 84.8% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 1.0% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 14.09 0% 20% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 60.1% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 83% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A YES N/A YES YES Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A YES N/A YES YES Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A YES N/A N/A YES High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 54 54 92.4% 0.6% 11.3% 7.6% 3.4% 3.2% 4 2% 5.4 60.5% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No N/A N/A N/A YES YES N/A N/A N/A YES YES N/A N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 CEP 11  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. The school's strengths relative to this Framework element are as follows: According to the Principal Performance Review Measures of Leadership Practice, PS65 expects a deep level of teacher planning and preparation and provides opportunities for teachers to deepen their learning. Pedagogical practices consistently reflect and support school wide belief of how students learn best. Teachers observed worked with individual or small groups of students to address needs and lesson reviewed provided evidence of student tasks at the intensive, strategic, and enrichment levels. The school's partnership with Generation Ready support and deepen teachers' capacity to address the diverse needs of all students including English Language Learners and Students with Disabilities. Consultants work closely with teachers to create cognitively demanding activities across all grades. Teachers are supported with the on-going opportunities of professional learning and job embedded coaching from consultants and administrators. Teachers are scheduled for District professional learning opportunities and inter-visitations with colleagues and/or mentored to hone and enhance pedagogical practices. A focus on professional development opportunities for teachers that fits the needs of their students as well as the level of performance for tea After aggregating the data of student performance on the New York State English as a Second Language Achievement Test (NYSESLAT), we noticed that the percentage of students performing at the proficiency level in listening was consistently lower than students in reading and writing in the same grade levels. Therefore, the need for this goal was generated due to our high population of English New Language Learner’s and our desire to close the achievement gap. Based on the results from the Fountas and Pinnell and the New York State English as a Second Language Achievement Tests it was indicative that ___ % of our English Language Learners are below the Proficient level. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, all teachers will create authentic literacy assessments for students in Kindergarten through 5th grade to achieve Common Core mastery among students through refined instructional practice. 2018-19 CEP 12  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Professional Development Opportunities will focus on providing teachers with strategies that will help them comprehend the importance of attending to oral language development, supporting academic language, and cultural sensitivity to the backgrounds of their students. These areas of knowledge will be purposefully and explicitly integrated into the preparation, certification, evaluation, and development of all teachers in the interest of improving positive outcomes for English as a New Language learner. Saturday Academy: students in 3rd through 5th grade, including ELLs and Students with Disabilities (SWDs), will be invited to attend to work on skills necessary for preparation for the New York State ELA & Math assessments. Select teachers at P.S. 65 in grades 3-5 will utilize materials such as Finish Line, EngageNY, Mathletics, myOn and guided reading books. Teachers will utilize data for goal setting and differentiated instruction with a focus on At-Risk students, Students with Disabilities, and English Language Learners. Teacher-led workshops for parents to address various topics of interest to English as a New Language Learner (ENL) parents in reading and writing to support the English Language Learner’s. The Parent Coordinator will work with teachers and parent representatives to develop a menu of workshops that interest and support parent engagement in the school. Parents will be invited to attend and participate in English as a New Language acquisition sessions designed for adult learners. All written communication will be sent home in English and will be translated in Spanish. Professional Development in the development of teacher pedagogy will be given to address the following: ● Indicators of Joint Productive Activities ● Developing Language Across the Curriculum ● Develop competence in the language and literacy of instruction across the curriculum ● Making Meaning: Connecting School to Students’ Lives — Connect teaching and curriculum to students’ experiences and skills of home and community Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All teachers in Grades K-5 9/2018-6/2019 All classroom teachers and administration Students in 3rd - 5th Grades 9/2018-6/2019 Selected classroom teachers in grades 3 rd - through 5 th grade and administration 9/2018-6/2019 Principal, Classroom Teachers, Parent Coordinator Parents or guardians of students attending P.S. 65 All Teachers in K-5 9/2018-6/2019 All teachers and Administrators 2018-19 CEP 13 ● Teaching Complex Thinking — Challenge students toward cognitive complexity ● Teaching Through Conversation — Engage students through dialogue, especially the Instructional Conversation. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. The Parent Coordinator will work with teachers and parent representatives to develop a menu of workshops that interest and support parent engagement in the school. Every Tuesday, grades K-5 will hold parent workshops based on this menu. All written communication will be sent home in English and will be translated in Spanish. We expect a 10 % increase in parent involvement as well as a rating of 4/4 for Strong Family Community Ties when assessed using the Framework for Great Teaching. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc.  Educational Consultants work with each grade to incorporate reading strategies and give support within the ReadyGen, EngageNY, and Go Math Programs.  Assistant Principals meet with their assigned grades weekly to facilitate common planning, provide professional development, and to support any concerns in meeting the CCLS.  Grade wide teacher teams meet during common preparation periods to analyze student work, aggregrated data and plan strategies to implement in their practices to improve student achievement.  Vertical Teams meet monthly to analyze school-wide data and to plan next steps to drive and improve instructional practices.  Saturday Academy -12 teachers will be hired to work with students in grades 3-5 Extended Day- program offered to targeted English language learners three days a week Assistant Principals and Educational Consultants will offer support to teachers and provide professional development to ensure curriculum alignment with Common Core Learning Standards. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. A midpoint benchmark that will be used in February to measure the school's progress toward meeting the Annual Goal is the Fountas and Pinnell Reading Level Benchmark assessment to identify a student's independent reading level. The teachers use the following assessments of skills to measure progress, effectiveness of the program: 2018-19 CEP 14  ● Beginning of the year Diagnostic Assessment-September 2017 ● Practice tests at the end of the unit ● Fountas and Pinnell (running records) Reading Assessment -to track growth, administered September, November, January, March, and May ● End of Chapter Math assessments ● Mid-Year Assessments-Periodic Assessments & ELA and Math Assessments created by grade to analyze student growth ● Progress in the classroom as reported by the classroom teacher ● Promotion In Doubt - Letters sent home to parents to warn of students not making adequate progress-February 2018 ● Progress Reports - sent home in October & February ● If additional services are required, the targeted students are then identified and Response to Intervention (RTI) is implemented by February 2018. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) The Fountas and Pinnell Benchmark system will be used to measure student progress Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 15  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? PS65 has woven the “We are a Family” mantra into the fabric of our school. We have determined that the school environment directly affects the quality of students’ relationships with other students and with the school’s staff. At PS65 we established: ● A caring school climate ● Parental involvement in schooling. We are poised to make parents partners in the school community. ● Clear rules and consequences in the school and family ● High expectations from teachers and parents ● Motivation to achieve ● School engagement ● Bonding to school At PS65, we believe that the social environment is shaped by many factors: ● The school’s espoused goals and values ● The principal’s leadership style ● The faculty’s teaching and discipline methods ● Positive reinforcement methods ● The policies regarding grading and tracking Priority needs of our school include  Creating innovative ways to inform parents of school happenings and keep them up to date with their child's progress Including students and parents in the planning and decision-making processes   Expanding after school programs for students to include recreational activities and student organizations Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By November 2018, 100% of students will be engaged in a character education program in order to help them develop strong moral character and become tolerant individuals whose actions reflect six key character traits (caring, responsibility, respect, fairness, trustworthiness and citizenship). 2018-19 CEP 16  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). School staff will develop comprehensive character education curriculum modeled after the Josephson Institute’s Center for Youth Ethics “Character Counts” program. Update: Students who have counseling services were introduced to the Character Counts program. From February to June, each grade will focus on one pillar a month of the Character Counts Program during lunch. Students will have complete projects and school-based activities to demonstrate this pillar. The winner for each grade will be acknowledged by the principal. Literature will be provided for each pillar. Videos such as "The Character Chronicles" will be watched in the cafeteria during lunch time. Community projects will be developed for spring. Other programs such as Fill Your Bucket Day and Poem in your Pocket will be planned as well as activities for upper grade students to work with lower grade students. Monthly read alouds and shared art and/or music lessons connected to the month’s theme (core virtue) will be implemented into the literacy curriculum. In addition, weekly character quotes will be included in morning classroom announcements and will be reinforced by all school staff. Students will engage in monthly self-reflection to assess the impact of the month’s activities and identify strategies to continue the work. Parents will be invited to classrooms monthly in order to see student reflections. Students will participate in community service projects such as the Garden Club and visitations to the Senior Citizen Center throughout the school year. Parent volunteers will be enlisted to assist students in completion of this work. School community will engage in food drives, toy drives and fundraising to save the environment. Students will also write Make a Wish letters to children, recycle cans and bottles to raise funds for our community garden, and participate in Career Day, an International Festival, and Bring Your Father to Work Day. Free mamograms will also be offered to members of the community. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All Students February All Staff members 2018-June 2018 All Students September 2017-June 2018 All Staff Members All Students February 2018 to June 2018 All staff Members & Parents All Students September 2017-June 2018 All Staff Members & Parents 2018-19 CEP 17  3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. School community will engage in food drives, toy drives and fundraising to save the environment. Students will also write Make a Wish letters to children, recycle cans and bottles to raise funds for our community garden, and participate in Career Day, an International Festival, and Bring Your Father to Work Day. Free mamograms will also be offered to members of the community. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. All School Staff Members, Approximately 30 copies per month of monthly read aloud book, monthly song and/or art piece for use in classroom, outreach to community for service opportunities, weekly assembly periods will be utilized to reinforce themes and promote program, 2-3 instructional periods dedicated to program per month. School funds may be utilized to purchase incentives or rewards for student participation. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February of 2018, teachers and parents will monitor students’ monthly self-evaluation for evidence of program’s impact. Effectiveness of program will be evident in teacher observations of student behavior and monitoring of Principal, Assistant Principals, School Aides & Guidance Counselor referrals. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Online Occurrence Reporting System (OORS) will be used to monitor and track the program’s effectiveness through the number of discipline reports entered in OORS. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 18  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. At PS 65K, we are committed to collaborative planning and creating interactive classroom environments for learning. As indicated by the last quality review, which was assessed by our Superintendent, (Joyce Harte Stallings) our teachers need to be developed in their pedagogy. Through scheduling and common preparatory periods, PS 65k teachers are given time to engage in deep conversations about teaching and learning. Such intensive, ongoing, and collaborative professional development is exactly what research shows to be most effective for improving both teachers' practice and student learning. Educators share best practices and brainstorm strategies for managing project-based learning instruction so that students will make the most of learning opportunities. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. The goal of collaboration is to give educators an opportunity to come together to discuss best practices and improve instruction at P.S. 065. The Professional Learning Community is in constant discussion about student work and ways to improve student outcomes. As per the desegregation of the data from Advance, we have teachers who are 10% highly effective, 60% effective, 27% developing and 3% ineffective. Our goal is to improve each percentage by 10% through common planning, inter-visitiations, and learning walks. 2018-19 CEP 19  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). enhance classroom Professional development will be geared towards teaching teachers how to perform ongoing, informal assessments, which is crucial to teaching reading. Teachers will learn how to use audio and visual resources to Professional development will be provided on the use of running records and miscue analysis, which are tools that will help teachers to identify patterns in student reading behaviors and the strategies a reader uses to make sense of text. Teachers will also learn how to inform their teaching on an ongoing basis, by keeping logs to reflect on their practices. instruction. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All K-5 Teachers 9/2017-6/2018 Principal, Assistant Principals, Coaches All K-5 Teachers 9/2017-6/2018 Principal, Assistant Principals, Coaches All K-5 Parents 9/2017-6/2018 Principal, Assistant Principals, Coaches All K-5 Parents 9/2017-6/2018 Principal, Assistant Principals, Coaches Professional learning will also focus on how to solicit feedback from their students through exit projects, one-legged conversations, Socratic Seminars and conferencing. Professional development will be given on student engagement, questioning and discussion. Parent workshops will be implemented on a bi-weekly basis to instruct and inform parents on the instructional shifts of the Common Core, which will help them to help their children. Professional Development on -Parent Engagement Plan: Tuesdays from 2:30-3:10, rotating schedule between the following activities: Parent workshop, update and revise website for parents in Spanish and in English, create weekly newsletters in Spanish and in English, update parent logs, and student work celebrations and awards. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Parent workshops will be implemented on a bi-weekly basis to instruct and inform parents on the instructional shifts of the Common Core, which will help them to help their children. 2018-19 CEP 20  Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Through the use of Administration, teachers, and K-5 Grade leaders we develop effective lesson studies and model these lessons for teachers in need. Teachers on horizontal teams will have common Preparatory Periods. Highly effective teachers will have common Preparatory periods with developing and ineffective teachers to mentor and perform vertical collaborative learning through Peer Inter-Visitations. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. In February 2018, teachers will conduct Fountas & Pinnell Reading Level benchmark assessments to measure student progress toward meeting the Annual Goal. By June 2018, teachers will engage in weekly collaborative grade-level Teacher Teams to modify curriculum in order to increase the level of entry points and differentiated tasks in order to provide consistent rigorous instruction to all students, including Students with Disabilities (SWDs) and English Language Learners with scaffold supports needed to make necessary growth. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. The Fountas & Pinnell Benchmark System will be used to assess progress. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 21  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Based on the results of the Principal Performance Observation, the findings stated that everybody at PS 65K knows where they are going and why. The focus is on achieving a shared vision, and all understanding their role in achieving the vision. The Principal’s focus and vision are developed from common beliefs and values, creating a consistent direction for all involved. Teachers and staff believe that all students can learn and meet high standards. While recognizing that some students must overcome significant barriers, these obstacles are not seen as insurmountable. Students are offered an ambitious and rigorous course of study. Effective instructional and administrative leadership is evident and helps to implement change processes. The leaders are proactive and seek help that is needed. They nurture an instructional program and school culture conducive to learning and professional growth. There is strong teamwork among teachers across all grades and with other staff. Everybody is involved and connected to each other, including parents and members of the community, to identify problems and work on solutions. The planned and actual curricula are aligned with the essential academic learning requirements (EALRs). Research-based teaching strategies and material are used. Staff understands the role of classroom and state assessments, what the assessments measure, and how student work is evaluated. A steady cycle of different assessments identifies students who need instructional support. More support and instructional time are provided, either during the school day or outside normal school hours, (afterschool and Saturday Academy) to students in need. Teaching is adjusted based on frequent monitoring of student progress and needs. Assessment results are used to focus and improve instructional programs. A strong emphasis is placed on training staff in areas of most need. Feedback from learning and teaching focuses extensive and ongoing professional development. The support is also aligned with the school or district vision and objectives. The school has a safe, civil, healthy and intellectually stimulating learning environment. Students feel respected and connected with the staff and are engaged in learning. Instruction is personalized and small learning environments increase student contact with teachers. There is a sense that all have a responsibility to educate students, not just teachers and staff in schools. Families, as well as businesses, social service agencies, and community colleges/universities, all play a vital role in this effort. The aforementioned is the area of concern for us at PS 65K. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2018, grades K-5 teachers teams will collaboratively develop rigorous CCLS-aligned Literacy units of study and performance tasks to improve rigorous instruction as measured by the development of four units of study. 2018-19 CEP 22  By June 2018, leadership will use the Advance data from the Danielson Framework for Teaching to provide informal instructional feedback that will result in a 10% increase in teachers rating effective and highly effective in domains 1 and 3. 2018-19 CEP 23  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Our parent involvement is still not at 100%. In order to improve parental involvement we will implement the following: All K-5 Parents and Community 9/2017-6/2018 Teachers, Parents and Administration ● Make regular homework assignments that require students to discuss what they are learning in class with their families. ● Provide a directory of community resources and activities that link to student learning skills and talents, including summer programs for students. ● Offer workshops to inform families of the high expectations and standards children are expected to meet in each grade level. Provide ways for families to support the expectations and learning at home. ● Engage families in opportunities to work with their children in setting their annual academic, college and career goals. Weekly Professional Development sessions held on Mondays will have an instructional focus based on results from the Quality Review that incorporates using the Danielson Framework for teaching and the Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS), and incorporating instructional shifts into teacher practice and student learning. Our instructional focus is to prepare students for college and career readiness by having high quality discussions with the Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS) tasks aligned to grade, data used to drive instruction, multiple entry points that engage all learners, differentiated instruction across all subject areas (centers, differentiated tasks/same outcomes) based on different types of learners and choice. 9/2017-6/2018 Lead Teachers & Administration All Classroom teachers in Kindergarten through 5th grade The administration team will develop observation cycles for each teacher. Communication of high expectations to staff, inclusive of training and a system of accountability via Teacher Reference Guide, ongoing differentiated professional development, weekly newsletter sent to teachers will be guided and focused, and informative and constructive administrative feedback (formal/informal). All Classroom teachers in Kindergarten through 5th grade 9/2017-6/2018 Administration 2018-19 CEP 24 Educational Consultants model lessons and assist grouping of students, especially English Language Learner’s and Students with Disabilities (SWD). Communication and support for gaining families understanding of high expectations for college and career readiness are addressed through Weekly Newsletter, Parent Communication Logs, Parent Workshops, Student work showcases celebrations, Project based learning through assignments, Cypress Afterschool Program, Nutrition and Wellness Committee, Student Government. All Classroom teachers in Kindergarten through 5th grade 9/2017-6/2018 Teachers, Parents and Administration 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. ommunication and support for gaining families understanding of high expectations for college and career readiness are addressed through Weekly Newsletter, Parent Communication Logs, Parent Workshops, Student work showcases celebrations, Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Teachers, parents, administration and educational consultants will be utilized to t improve student outcomes and school performance. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. The teachers use the following assessments of skills to measure progress, effectiveness of the program:  Beginning of the year Diagnostic Assessment-September 2017  Practice tests at the end of the unit  Fountas and Pinnell (running records) Reading Assessment -to note growth, given Sept., Nov., Jan., March, and May  End of Chapter assessments  Mid-Year Assessments-Periodic Assessments & ELA and Math Assessments created by grade to analyze student growth  Progress in the classroom as reported by the classroom teacher.  Promotion In Doubt-Letters sent home to parents to warn of students not making adequate progress  Progress Reports-sent home in October 2017 & February 2018 2018-19 CEP 25   If additional services are required, the targeted students are then identified and Response to Intervention (RTI) is implemented by February 2018. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. The Fountas and Pinnell Reading Assessment will be used to assess progress. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 26  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. At PS 65K, instead of assuming that absence means non-caring, we as educators understand the barriers that hinder some parents from participating in their child's education.  We provide the time, resources, and methods to help out.  Parents feel welcomed at our school.  They feel that what they may have to offer is important and appreciated.  Parents are empowered to believe that they have knowledge that the school is interested in knowing.  The parents have a great deal of interest in the school or his/her child's education.  The parents feel that education is important.  Parents are not made to feel embarrassed for any reason at all.  Many of our parents are illiterate or unable to speak English.  Communication is not difficult or impossible, because many of the staff members are bilingual.  Parents are invited to have breakfast with the principal on a monthly basis.  Parent workshops are conducted weekly.  We order food from the local restaurants.  Provide food and clothes for the local food pantry.  Grandparent day is an invitational event that has met with success. Bring Your Father to School Day is an annual event created to increase paternal participation in school events.  An open house program at school brings in parents and we stressed the important of greeting these visiting parents face-to-face as quickly as possible.  Greeting visitors with a sign in their own language is very inviting and welcoming. Pamphlets and school literature are provided in multiple languages to allow parents access to their child's education Parents are invited to school events such as the annual Science Fair, International Festival, school plays, and Career Day Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2018, we hope to have a 10% increase in parental and community involvement based on the numbers from our parent survey. We will provide programs to assist parents in parenting, academic help, and immigration services. We also want to implement a pipeline to college program. We will receive a 4/4 on the Framework for Great Schools on Strong Parent-Community ties. 2018-19 CEP 27  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Strategy #1 -Agreeing on core values: Taking time at the beginning to think deeply and reflect about what participants believe, and why they think the efforts will work. Strategy #2 - Listening to the community: Identifying priorities and developing an action plan in a collaborative way that creates community consensus around what needs to happen and in what sequence. Strategy #3 - Using data to set priorities and focus strategies: Looking closely at current achievement trends and addressing areas of weakness in students’ knowledge and skills. Strategy #4 - Providing relevant, on-site professional development: Basing professional development on data and conversations among stakeholders, in a way that builds both educator-educator and educator-parent collaborations. Strategy #5 - Building collaborations with community partners: Pulling in strategic partners and developing community buy-in—with colleges, social service agencies, community groups, faith-based organizations, local leaders, public officials, and businesses—to improve student learning and other outcomes. Strategy #6 - Using targeted outreach to focus on high needs communities, schools, and students: Identifying groups that need special attention, learning about their concerns and needs, and responding in culturally appropriate ways. Strategy #7 - Building one-to-one relationships between families and educators that are linked to learning: Taking time to have conversations and reach agreement on how best to collaborate in order to improve student achievement. Strategy #8 - Setting, communicating, and supporting high and rigorous expectations: Making it clear that success is the norm by creating pathways to college, especially for students at risk and those at the margins, and providing students with support to succeed. Strategy #9 - Addressing cultural differences: Providing support for teachers and education support professionals to bridge barriers of culture, class, and language. Strategy #10 - Connecting students to the community: Making learning hands-on and relevant to students’ lives while also showing that students and schools serve the community Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Parents and Community 9/2017-6/2018 PS 65K staff Parents and Community 9/2017-6/2018 PS 65K staff Parents and Community 9/2017-6/2018 PS 65K staff Parents and Community 9/2017-6/2018 PS 65K staff 2018-19 CEP 28  3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. Building one-to-one relationships between families and educators that are linked to learning: Taking time to have conversations and reach agreement on how best to collaborate in order to improve student achievement. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Flexible scheduling, translators and translation services, Partnering CBOs Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2018 a Mid year benchmark Fountas & Pinnell assessment will be conducted to predict student progress. Progress monitoring is used to assess student progress or performance in those areas in which they were identified by universal screening as being at-risk for failure (e.g., reading, mathematics, social behavior). It is the method by which teachers or other school personnel determine if students are benefiting appropriately from the typical (e.g., grade level, locally determined, etc.) instructional program, identify students who are not making adequate progress, and help guide the construction of effective intervention programs for students who are not profiting from typical instruction (Fuchs & Stecker, 2003). Classroom observations, paired with feedback help teachers develop clear and measurable next steps to further develop their practice and student outcomes. Professional Learning Opportunities are developed in order to address deficits noted by administration in order to improve student outcomes by engaging, managing behavior, challenging students and consolidating knowledge. Teachers are evaluated as per their classroom observations using the Danielson Frameworks and based on the results of the first round of observations next steps are then part of the Professional Learning Opportunities during the allotted time on Monday afternoons. Teachers are developed on an individual needs basis, based on the data that is collected during observations. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Fountas & Pinnell Reading Assessment Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 29  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) English Language Arts (ELA) ● SWD, ● ELLS ● Attendance problems ● Family-related issues ● Nutrition-related issues ● Discipline problems ● Health-related issues ● Mobility/transfer issues Mathematics ● SWD, ● ELLS ● Attendance problems Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) • Use of intervention components in reading series • Use of online resources in reading series • Vocabulary development • Pre-read in small groups • Books on tape / auditory recordings of stories • Reader’s theater to boost fluency • High interest/low level reading materials Model correct speech • Encourage eye-contact with speaker • Extra time to process • Prompts to expand use of language • Prompts to slow down for sake of articulation • Prompts to remain on topic • Verbal cues to encourage verbal communication • Teach signal words and key words ● Manipulatives, repetition, singing and dancing. Usage When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) During, before, after and Saturday School Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) ● Differentiation of instruction, small group, one to one tutoring. Student/mentor programs. ● Paired Reading ● Error Correction & Word Drill Techniques ● Mental Imagery: Improving Text Recall ● Differentiation of instruction, small group, one to one tutoring. During, before after and Saturday School 2018-19 CEP 30  Science Student/mentor programs. ● Student Self-Monitoring of Productivity to Increase Fluency ● Peer Tutoring in Math Computation with Constant Time Delay Differentiation of instruction, small group, one to one tutoring. Student/mentor programs. During, before, after and Saturday School ● Family-related issues ● Nutrition-related issues ● Discipline problems ● Health-related issues ● Mobility/transfer issues ● SWD, ● ELLS ● Attendance problems ● Family-related issues ● Nutrition-related issues ● Discipline problems ● Health-related issues ● Mobility/transfer issues of pneumonic devices, increase accuracy and productivity rates Via self-monitoring and performance feedback ● Increase Accuracy By Intermixing Easy and Challenging Computation Problems ● Promote Mastery of Math Facts Through Incremental Rehearsal • Vocabulary development • Pre-teach concepts in small groups • Use of online resources of math series List objectives and goals for lesson and/or day at a glance • Differentiate instruction into tiers or by learning style / multiple intelligence • Use of formative, summative, formal, and informal assessments • Data: Use data from classroom tests and assignments to inform instruction and re-teach where necessary • Provide rubrics with expectations before assigning a task or project • Present information in multiple formats (visual, graphic 2018-19 CEP 31  Social Studies ● SWD, ● ELLS ● Attendance problems ● Family-related issues ● Nutrition-related issues organizer, auditory, etc.) • Mnemonics and memory aides • Cooperative-learning strategies with clearly defined roles (ex. Think-Pair-Share) • Flexible grouping for ability based instruction • Use review games to make learning fun • Use of flashcards to aid in study and recall • Cross-content integration • Repetition and repeated practice • Instructional model: Introduction --> Guided practice --> Independent practice Workshop Model • Instruction in test-taking strategies • Peer tutoring: same age or cross age • Allow students to recycle assignments and tests • Have students write their own study questions or tests. • Prioritize tasks with stars or by highlighting • Pre-teach content vocabulary across content areas List objectives and goals for lesson and/or day at a glance • Differentiate instruction into tiers or by learning style / multiple intelligence During, after and Saturday School Differentiation of instruction, small group, one to one tutoring. Student/mentor programs . 2018-19 CEP 32  ● Discipline problems ● Health-related issues ● Mobility/transfer issues • Use of formative, summative, formal, and informal assessments • Data: Use data from classroom tests and assignments to inform instruction and re-teach where necessary • Provide rubrics with expectations before assigning a task or project • Present information in multiple formats (visual, graphic organizer, auditory, etc) • Mnemonics and memory aides • Cooperative-learning strategies with clearly defined roles (ex. Think-Pair-Share) • Flexible grouping for ability based instruction • Use review games to make learning fun • Use of flashcards to aid in study and recall • Cross-content integration • Repetition and repeated practice • Instructional model: Introduction --> Guided practice --> Independent practice Workshop Model • Instruction in test-taking strategies • Peer tutoring: same age or cross age • Allow students to recycle assignments and tests • 2018-19 CEP 33 Counseling During, after and Saturday School At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) ● SWD, ● ELLS ● Attendance problems ● Family-related issues ● Nutrition-related issues ● Discipline problems ● Health-related issues ● Mobility/transfer issues Have students write their own study questions or tests. • Prioritize tasks with stars or by highlighting • Pre-teach content vocabulary across content areas • Structure and consistency in classroom environment • Establish classroom rules and expectations • Provide options and choices (i.e. where to complete work in the room) • Use of timer • Preferential seating; sit next to peer-model • Incorporate opportunities for movement within the classroom • Integration of character education into curriculum • Logical consequences • Opportunities for breaks and “time-outs” • Cueing, Prompting, and Praising systems: • Catch them doing right! • Positive attention and specific praise • Make a “connection” with student through 1:1 attention or interest in his/her interests • Visual prompts and signals • Physical prompts and signals, 2018-19 CEP 34  including the use of teacher proximity • Advance warning of transitions and changes in schedule • Reinforcements: • Reward system: daily, weekly behavior charts • Self-monitoring behavior charts • Behavior contracts • Behavior plan or chart • Give student a “job” or classroom responsibility • Involve student in a greater cause -- community service (K-Kids) • Communication between home and school (email, phone, communication journal, planner, etc) • Support from the office or administration • Social Skills: • Social role-play activities in class • Non-mandated social skills group 2018-19 CEP 35  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. Full time Guidance Counselor will be available to offer support to students Parent Coordinator will work with parents to provide information about community services available Students will be provided with school uniforms Students will be provided with school supplies Provide parents with information to connect with Students in Temporary Housing Content Experts At this current time there are 165 students in Temporary Housing (ATS-11/09/2016). Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 CEP 36  N/A 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. N/A 2018-19 CEP 37  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. ● Demonstrates competence in each core academic subject area in which the teacher teaches ● Has maintained a satisfactory rating ● Demonstrates the ability to place children at the heart of the institution ● The principal and teacher volunteers will attend hiring fairs and recruit highly qualified teachers. ● The principal will work closely with the members of the school based hiring committee to screen and interview applicants. ● The principal will facilitate a new teacher orientation session to acclimate new staff to the school’s policies and procedures before the beginning of the school year. ● Mentors will be assigned to support struggling, new and unqualified teachers ● The school’s secretary will work with the CFN HR Director to ensure that non-HQT meet all required documentation and assessment deadlines. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). Teachers must not jump directly into exercises around higher-order thinking skills in an effort to meet Common Core without setting a precise and stable foundation of knowledge skills, building progressively toward the goal of student-directed, cognitively complex tasks. The ideal teacher training will focus on a learning progression that begins with communicating clear learning goals and setting scales or rubrics for tracking student progress. This foundation will lead to helping students interact with the specific innovative knowledge they need to think through and evaluate higher-order problems. Teachers will then use specific strategies to practice and deepen this new knowledge with students. All these classroom activities are teacher directed . The final step is to move toward student directed generating and testing of hypotheses, or what we sometimes refer to as "discovery learning." A solid foundation in Common Core is followed by trainings focused on the progression we have outlined above – from understanding how to align learning goals to Common Core standards through problem-based learning in authentic real-world tasks. The training concludes with strategies to maintain astronomical student engagement at a high level . ● The principal will regularly attend professional development and turnkey emerging best practices to the learning community. ● Teachers will attend professional development sessions sponsored by outside consultants ● Teachers will share best practices during weekly professional development sessions. 2018-19 CEP 38  Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). ● Get to know and understand the children, their previous experiences and their families.  Develop an inclusive inventory of all programs in the district: home, public and private pre-school, faith-based, developmental day, homeless, itinerant services, child care placements, early intervention, Even Start, Migrant, Head Start and Parents As Teachers  Design and implement a checklist of necessary paperwork and information for preschool teachers to complete for students entering kindergarten.  Meet with preschool teachers to review assessments and work sample portfolio information. Exchange information and experiences that create as much continuity as possible when children move from one setting to another.  Provide opportunities and time for kindergarten teachers to implement home visits, prepare classroom environment and plan for orientation needs (needed supplies, time, and financial support).  Meet families before the first day of school through staggered entry possibilities, home visits, evening socials, open houses, beginner’s day and others. Spring  Develop communication strategies with families that will provide an ongoing dialogue about their children, recognizing that families are the best advocates for experts on their children. Ask families to describe their children’s previous experiences through surveys and interviews. Include information regarding service providers, such as, physician, therapist and preschool teacher.  Utilize the Kindergarten Health Assessment (KHA) as a communication tool between families, physicians and schools.  Develop a profile of pertinent information on each child entering kindergarten. Include needs, language, culture, interests, strengths and developmental levels. Include family expectations, hopes and dreams for their child.  Provide opportunities for preschool and kindergarten teachers to meet and collaborate throughout the year. ● Plan an appropriate and welcoming environment for meeting the needs of each child.  Develop and implement a ready schools plan. Use the Ready Schools Inventory and other resources to identify needs and goals. 2018-19 CEP 39   Coordinate a professional development approach to bring care providers, preschool teachers, kindergarten teachers and support staff together to discuss, learn and plan appropriate programs for young children .  Develop common planning time for teachers on a daily, weekly and long-term basis in order to provide children what they need to learn, grow and thrive.  Plan developmentally appropriate curriculum and policies (age, cultural and individual appropriateness) for all programs in the care and education of children. Modify learning environments based on individual needs.  Provide families a description of the classroom environment and a typical day. Identify the curriculum and scope of the program.  Observe and evaluate the use of appropriate curriculum and instructional practices in the classroom setting. ● Implement a plan that will ensure successful transitions for children and their families.  Involve support staff, service providers (OT, PT, Speech) school nurses, and guidance counselors as a part of transition plans, activities and screenings.  Use a variety of procedures for supporting transitions such as home visits, gradual or staggered entry, health screenings and developmental screenings.  Make class rosters available to teachers as soon as possible. Encourage home visits and planning for a smooth transition.  Plan an orientation and open house at the beginning of the year that sets the tone for good communication between school personnel and family. Have a translator available, when possible.  Create partnerships with local preschools and invite their preschoolers to visit the school. 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. ● Teachers meet 4 times each week to share data from assessments and co-plan performance tasks. ● Teachers will be given quarterly surveys to determine the areas of need and drive the school-wide professional development plan. ● Teachers will attend selected external professional development workshops in the areas of assessment and interpretation of assessment data. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Column B Verify with an (X) Section Reference(s) 2018-19 CEP 40  Title I Part A (Basic) Federal 557,489.00 Title II, Part A Federal 121,523.00 Title III, Part A Federal 19,204.00 Title III, Immigrant Federal 0 Tax Levy (FSF) Local 3,424,446.00 X X X X X 15-17 5A-Section 3 19-20 5B-Section 3 22-23 5C-Section 3 25-26 5D-Section 3 29-31 5E-Section 3 15-17 5A-Section 3 19-20 5B-Section 3 22-23 5C-Section 3 25-26 5D-Section 3 29-31 5E-Section 3 15-17 5A-Section 3 19-20 5B-Section 3 22-23 5C-Section 3 25-26 5D-Section 3 29-31 5E-Section 3 15-17 5A-Section 3 19-20 5B-Section 3 22-23 5C-Section 3 25-26 5D-Section 3 29-31 5E-Section 3 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows: 2018-19 CEP 41   Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 CEP 42  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. PS65, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community PS65 will support parents and families of Title I students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; The school’s Parent Involvement 2018-19 CEP 43 Parental Involvement and School Quality  The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g.,ESSA./State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Every Student Succeeds Act.; ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; 2018-19 CEP 44  ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) School-Parent Compact (SPC) PS65 , in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; 2018-19 CEP 45  ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; Provide general support to parents by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; 2018-19 CEP 46  ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 2018-19 CEP 47  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 2018-19 CEP 48  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: The primary grades are extremely important in creating college and career ready students. A current analysis of our school’s data indicates that it is necessary to provide our English Language Learners in grades K-2 with additional support. To meet the needs of our English Language Learners in grades K, 1 and 2, students will participate in after school learning cycles, focus on reading, writing, phonics, fluency, comprehension, vocabulary and decoding. It is extremely difficult for the kindergarten, first and second grade English Language Learners, who are “Entering," on the NYSESLAT meet the expectations of the Common Core Learning Standards. As a result, P.S. 065 proposes to continue our after school ENL supplemental program targeting the English Language Learners in the grades K-2. We will provide targeted instruction to our lowest third students who achieved "Entering" and Emerging" levels on the NYSESLAT exam. The program will be conducted in cycles. The ENL teacher will team teach with a grade K common branch teacher from November-January. The ENL teacher will then team teach with a common branch teacher on Grade 1 from January to March. The ENL teacher will then team teach with a common branch teacher on Grade 2 from March to June. The after-school program will take place on Wednesday's and Thursday's from 2:35 p.m. to 4:00 p.m. This program will start January 10, 2019 and continue until mid-June, 2019. Additionally, beginning in December, the first and second grade ENL students will have the opportunity to attend Saturday Academy in monthly cycles as well. In December, first grade will attend and in January, grade 2 will attend. The ENL teacher will team teach with a common branch teacher on each grade. The First and Second grade ENL Saturday Academy will continue to reinforce areas of need as indicated by data results and are targeted during the regular school day and the ENL after-school program. This Saturday Academy program will be three hours per Saturday. One supervisor will be supervising the ENL program and the after school program simultaneously. To support our Spanish native language students, instruction will be provided in both English and Spanish. Instructional activities will include phonics work, using repetition examples such as poetry and song to support language acquisition, word work, sight word activities, writing practice activities, and listening and technology centers where students can practice skills together and independently. Materials will include a SmartBoard, computers, writing workbooks, word/phonetics games, tablets, libraries in English and Spanish, textbooks, personal whiteboards, and computer software. Records will be maintained utilizing a data binder, portfolio assessments, and baseline, mid-line, and end-line exams to drive instruction. Students will be grouped based on their NYSESLAT scores. Materials such as, Continental Press' Practice Exercises in Basic English Grades 1-5, New York ELL's will be purchased to support student learning. Additionally, Getting Ready for NYSESLAT will be utilized for the after-school program and for Saturday Academy. These materials will not be used for daily instruction. The program details will be provided during parent workshops on Tuesday's as well as letters written in English, Spanish, and Arabic. Attendance sheets will be provided for teachers to take accurate attendance. 2018-19 CEP 49  Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: The Title III Program teachers will participate in professional development (PD) opportunities in-house and outside of the school building in order to ensure that all English Language Learners are receiving quality instruction. The in-house professional development will be given by the supervisor and the ENL teacher on Tuesday afternoons, once a month. The Professional development sessions will focus on how to differentiate the instruction for our ENL students, what resources they need to succeed, the structure of an ENL lesson, assessments of ENL students, multiple entry points for ENL students, and engaging ENL students in the classroom. We will be implementing these PD's in monthly cycles. In addition, teachers will have access to the the video library on the DOE website and will be provided the time to conduct action research and set goals for their target students. The PD's will positively impact the progress of the ENL students because teachers will enhanced their pedagogical practices when it comes to teaching the ENL population. We believe that the more prepared and knowledgeable our teachers are, it will allow for an increase in ENL student achievement. Teachers will stay current in educating different subgroups of students, especially ENL students. Professional development learning opportunities will be conducted from September 2018 until June 2019 in cycles. Agendas, attendance sheets, and minutes will be collected for each Professional Development session and will be kept in an ENL professional development binder. The ENL teacher who will be providing professional development to other teachers will be sent to PD outside of the building and the information will be turn-keyed to staff members. The teachers who are working in the title III program will receive on-going PD once a month on Tuesday afternoon from 3:20-4:00 p.m., after parent engagement. Some tentative topics for monthly professional development include Common Core Planning for ENL students (November), Teaching Informational Texts to ENL (December) Creating a Planning Process that Meets ENL Student Needs (January), Preparing our students for the NYSESLAT (February), How to ensure that ENL students are provided with a language skills they understand (March) , Ways to increase verbal interaction in the classroom (April), Ways to contextualize language during instruction (May), How to get ENL students actively involved in the classroom (June). The provider of these PD's will be Danielle Grace, the ENL teacher of P.S. 065. Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: Parental engagement is crucial to the success of our ENL students. Parental activities will include workshops/multicultural events once a month. Parent workshops will ensure that our 2018-19 CEP 50  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities parents are familiar with our after school curriculum so that they parents will be able to support their children at home with learning and practicing the English language. If students are not exempt from state exams, we will be working closely with the parents to inform them of test taking strategies on how to help the ENL children succeed when studying at home. In addition to supplying the parents with the skills and strategies they need to support the English Language Learners in our school, we will also be providing reading, writing, and technology workshops for our parents to enhance their literacy skills so that they can better support our students at home. Refreshments will be provided at these meetings as well as take-home materials for the parents to use with their children. We will also have a multi-cultural night to celebrate the diverse population of our students in the English Language Learners after-school program. All parents will be notified in their preferred language via telephone, mail correspondence, and parent newsletters. All Parent Workshops will be given in their preferred language as well. The Title III Teacher, Parent Coordinator, and other staff members will serve as translator assistants during workshops to accommodate all native languages. The ENL teacher will keep a parent engagement binder with sign in sheets, flyers, letters, feedback, and dates of all events. We will have translators at these meetings to assist the ENL teacher. All letters will be translated in the language of our students. A school message (School Messenger) will go out in English and in Spanish, reminding parents of the workshops. In addition, a monthly calendar of events goes out to all parents in English and in Spanish. Tentative topics include, Ways that ENL parents can help student with their academics at home (November), Strategies and examples in mathematics (December), Ways ENL parents can participate and be involved in school (January), Preparing your child for NYSESLAT and Reviewing levels, sample tests, etc. (February), Strategies to help your child study for the NYSESLAT (March), Reading tips for parents of elementary-aged students and Tips for parents to promote learning at home ((April), and NYSESLAT Scoring-levels-How will my child be scored on the exam? (May) and Tips for summer learning and How can I ensure that my child is receiving a quality education over the summer? (June). The workshops are at no cost to the program. The provider of these parental engagement activities will be Danielle Grace the ENL teacher and Altagracia Batista, the parent coordinator. Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits) n/a  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. n/a Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental. n/a Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. n/a n/a n/a 2018-19 CEP 51  Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a 2018-19 CEP 52  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 19 School Name Public School 65 Borough Brooklyn School Number 065 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Ms. Daysi Garcia Coach type here ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher TBD Teacher/Subject Area Ms. Quinones Grade 1, All Subj Teacher/Subject Area Mrs. Maraldo/ Resource Related-Service Provider Ms. Johnson Superintendent Mr. Thomas Mcbryde Jr. Assistant Principal Ms. Ilana Mandel-Latorre Coach type here School Counselor Mr. Galassi Parent Mrs. Espinal Parent Coordinator Mrs. Panteleon Field Support Center Staff Member Olga DeFilippis Other (Name and Title) type here C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 0 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 1 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics 2018-19 CEP 53  Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 660 Total number of ELLs 155 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 23.48% Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 3 0 0 0 4 0 0 0 2 0 0 0 5 0 0 0 6 0 0 0 7 0 0 0 8 0 0 0 9 0 0 0 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? Students at Public School 65 are assessed using Fountas and Pinnell, teacher created assessments and DUO Lingo. Fountas and Pinnell is used to measure students' independent reading level in English every two to three months. Once the independent reading level is determined, students are given books on their reading level for instruction and in small guided group instruction. Beginning of the Year (BOY) Ready Gen Assessments, Common Core State Performance Task and teacher made assessment are also used to get a better understanding of the students’ overall literacy skills. The data collected from these resources are used to determine what type of materials are necessary to use to support learners. In addition, the data collected help administrators determine what type of additional academic support is necessary to offer to ENL students such as AIS, extended day or Saturday Academy. Based on the data collected, it is determined that ENL students are performing at a a slightly lower level than those who are not ENL students and requires additional lessons in phonics. 2018-19 CEP 54  2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? We have an assessment calendar which is given out to all of the staff. Teachers and the support team are aware of when ENL data is due. Data must be analyzed and disaggregated in a timely manner. The data must be used to drive the instruction of the teachers, the ENL teacher, and support staff. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? The success of our ELL program is determined by scores on the NYSESLAT. The movement a student makes from one performance level to another over several years is another indicator of the effectiveness of the ELL program. We are clearly focused on the students' scale score and performance on the NYS ELA and Math exams. The administrative team, the ENL teacher and the AIS department review the ELL progress from the RLAT, NYSITELL and ELL Periodic assessment to determine area of growth and areas requiring extra support. Teachers submit the Beginning, Middle and End of Year Assessment, End of Unit Assessments, Quizzes, Diagnostics, School -wide Assessment in ELA and Math. The administrators and teachers can track areas in specific skills that students need to focus on. Students data is track through the various data that is collected. The data informs of progress is being made with the school but especially with ENL students. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? We have an assessment calendar which is given out to all of the staff. Teachers and the support team are aware of when ENL data is due. Data must be analyzed and disaggregated in a timely manner. The data must be used to drive the instruction of the teachers, the ENL teacher, and support staff. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] Throughout the school year, teachers work collaboratively in grade meetings and during one on one conferences to discuss and review students' data. The school has systematically evaluated and determined students' performance and needs using the benchmark tests, Foutas and Pinnell, classroom assessments, monthly assessments and End of Unit assessments. Data is reviewed during the grade meetings and one on one conferences with teachers to discuss students overall data. Data generated from formal and informal assessment are used for planning core instruction as well as delivering other layers of instruction using RTI model. The strength and weakness of students in the different modalities are then reviewed and individual goals and plans of actions are created to meet students needs. Teachers differentiate instruction to meet the needs of all learners. In addition, extended day programs are offered to all ENL students. After a careful review of interim, monthly assessments, unit exams, running records and standardized data, students who score within Level 1 are initially targeted for Tier I intervention, which includes differentiation of the lesson by process, incorporating visuals that show corresponding words, partner work with a bilingual student who speaks the same native language and assignment of homework activities that promote vocabulary development and comprehension. All students in the school use Myon online which is an online program that builds vocabulary and increases reading comprehension. Students also have access to online programs such as MyOn. Spanish speakers are able to read e-books in their native language and answer comprehension questions after each book is read. The program allows students to download books onto their tablet which is provided by the school. Internet connection is not needed to read books and answer the questions on MyOn. Tier II intervention for ELLs includes small group instruction during Guided Reading and the Math workshop, supplemental workbooks in students' native language (Spanish), 20-minutes a day of phonics and vocabulary using the Wordly Wise 3000. Monthly assessments are administered to students in reading and writing. In addition, students receive Extended Day Academy which meets three a week. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. 2018-19 CEP 55  The data from the NYSITELL as well as the NYSESLAT exam informs our ENL programs. T 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? The programs operate just like any classroom during the school day. Mini-lessons and assessments are planned. Data is collected and used to drive instruction. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. The ENL students are grouped together in a heterogeneous classroom. Instruction is organized and delivered in a integrated and small group model as well. Instruction is differentiated to meet the needs of students. Teachers also incorporate language objectives in their lesson plan to ensure that ENL students are being supported in the different modalities throughout the day. The ENL teacher works closely with the classroom teachers in providing additional support to teachers. b. TBE program. If applicable. Paste response to questions here: c. DL program. If applicable. Paste response to questions here: 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? The result of the NYSESLAT and the NYSITELL indicate how the ELLs are classify. The ENL teacher and assistant principal review the NYSESLAT to ensure the appropriate number of instructional minutes as per CR 154. The school ensure that the mandated number of instructional minutes are provided by ensuring that students in the different classification receive the mandatory amount of minutes. The school ENL Program breakdown Entering students - 2 Units (360 minutes) ENL instruction per week. Entering students receives 1 unit of ENL instruction (180 minutes) and 1 unit of study in ENL/ELA (180 minutes). Emerging students - 2 units (360 min. ENL instruction per week. .5 unit (90 min.) of study in ENL, 1 unit of collaborative instruction in ENL/ELA (180 min.) and .5 units (90 min.) of study of integrated ENL/Content area in social science &science. Transitioning students- 1 unit (180 min.)of study per week, .5 units (90 min.) of unit of study in ENL/ ELA; .5 unit of study of integrated ENL/ Content area in social studies & science. Expanding students- 1 units (180 min.) of study per week. 1 unit of study in ENL/ELA. Commanding students - .5unit of study per week of integrated ENL in ELA. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. 2018-19 CEP 56  Content areas in math, science, and social studies are covered with scaffolding and other ENL approaches. Workbook and textbooks are purchased in Spanish to provide that additional support to the students. The ENL program is designed to develop skills in understanding, speaking, reading, writing and communicating in English through integration of academic content area. Students are assessed through the common core standards when they arrive at their class. Fountas &Pinnell are used to evaluate their reading levels, Performance Tasks is reading, math, science are also used to determine level of instruction needed for each student. Teachers use Sheltered Instruction to teach academic vocabulary and language objectives while teaching the curriculum that is being used in the school. Students are grouped in a supportive environment containing various levels in order to ensure support as well as engagement. Students are provided differentiated work in their groups to meet their needs. Supports include graphic organizers, Spanish/English dictionaries, thesauruses , word banks, sight word chains, word walls with pictures, definitions as well as supporting passages. Students are supported by the teacher to write goals in reading , writing, math science and social studies. These goals are reviewed and updated every 6 to 8 weeks. Reading levels are tested 6-8 times a year as well. Teachers have a data- binder with progress on every student in their class. Projects are assigned and differentiated as needed including language. English/ Spanish packages for projects are provided. Articles in both languages are also provided for current event homework on a weekly basis. Go Math support is also provided in both languages as are assessments which are also given in both languages. Homework help workshops are provided in both languages to help understand the new common core standards. Common Core Standards booklets materials and workshops are provided in both languages. Our reading program, Ready-Gen has also been purchased with an ENL component. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? Data is created for each students upon entering the class/grade. Reading levels are established, goals are created with the support of their teachers. Go Math exams are provided in both language as to provide the accessibility for either language, Performance Tasks are also created in Reading and Writing o assess students' progress throughout the year. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status Instructions are differentiated to meet the needs of all learners. SIFE, Newcomer and Developing students receives oral language and literacy instruction in their Native Language and in English. Many of the sentences are written in simple sentences. Real life situation and connection are made to the subject. SIFE and Newcomer receives intensive reading and literacy instruction. Students have access to online program that will support their understanding of the content and subject being taught. Newcomers are allowed to use more visual and auditory support, picture dictionary, word to word translation dictionary, vocabulary and word studies. Things in the classroom are label in English and their Native Language. Developing ENL students are encourage to take more risk. They also use a lot of visuals and depend less on the translation. They are able to write longer paragraphs. They are encourage to use thesaurus and dictionaries. Long term ENL are given graphic organizers that will promote clear understanding of the language and subject. All ENL students are given more time to complete a task. In math, all ENL students are offered translation books and manipulatives. All ENL receive visual and audio support in the lesson. All ELL's are paired with other ELL learners in the classroom. Student are paired with a native speaker to help with the transition and for tutorial support. Former ELLs up to two after exiting ELL status continues to receive AIS support in the classroom and receives extended time for testing modifications. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? Teachers use graphic organizers, visuals, manipulatives and connections are made to their Native language and prior knowledge. Vocabulary and word study development are critical in providing that academic content. Connection to the topic is also necessary to build that academic understanding of the topic. 2018-19 CEP 57  7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? With the increased availability and use of technology our teachers are more easily able to adapt our curricula to meet the needs of all of our ELLs including SWD-ELLs. This curricular flexibility is enhanced by instructionally flexible co-teaching models which we are encouraging our ENL and other teachers of ELLS to embrace. With an increase in the collaboration of our ESl teacher teacher and his colleagues in setting goals and objectives as well as planning and implementing interdisciplinary lessons which are more academically rigorous while promoting English language development, we expect greater learning outcomes from all of ELL students. Although our ENL teacher implements lessons primarily in a tight schedule. Instructional ENL model, he is encouraged to work with colleagues to provide integrated teaching so that groups of ENL students are able to benefit inside a regular classroom environment. ELL -SWD are placed in a least restrictive environment because they are in ICT classrooms. They are offered the same curriculum as the general education students but instruction is modified to meet their Individual Educational Plans. Students are given more support and offered visual and hands-on. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. Several different intervention programs and services are in place to support our ELL population . The SIOP plan is another form of intervention that is used in the school. The SIOP method is a lesson plan format that is used to support many ddifferent ELL components. SIOP lesson plans are also used to tie together the different subjects in the school. Many visuals and hands on materials are included in this lesson format. Total Physical Response (TPR) and technology are also regularly used in the lessons. Small and guided groups instruction are provided for students who are ELLs in ELA, math, science and social studies. Extended services is also used to provided that additional help for our ELLs. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? Drama to be used to support the different modalities. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? There are no ELL programs that have discontinued in the school this year. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. All ELL students are given equal access to the different programs that are offered in the school. They are able to participate in everything that is available to any students in their grade level. Students are able to attend the program where they will work in ELA, Math, Science, Social Studies and communication. ELLs in the building are included in all activities and programs that is offered in the school. During the school day ELLs are supported by out of classroom teachers and assistant principals with guided reading, writing and any other support that they might need. ENL after school academy is offered to all current and former ELLs. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. Technology plays a big role in ENL program. The teachers use SMART Board in their classroom. The NYSESLAT and Beyond is one of the books that is utilize to support our ENL learners. Many hands on manipulative are also used to support math instruction. Materials on vocabulary development and support are provided to all students. Focus is placed on students to develop their language, reading, speaking, and writing skills. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Home language is support by providing students with books that are in their Native Language. Classroom teachers translate many of the lessons to help in making sure that students have a clear understanding of the language. Students are provided a word to word dictionary. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. 2018-19 CEP 58  New York State Common Core Standards and curricula are used to plan instruction and activities in the class. The different activities are differentiated based on the students' ages, grade, level of proficiency and ability. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? Technology plays a big role in ENL program. The teachers use SMART Board in their classroom. The NYSESLAT and Beyond is one of the books that is utilize to support our ENL learners. Many hands on manipulative are also used to support math instruction. Materials on vocabulary development and support are provided to all students. Focus is placed on students to develop their language, reading, speaking, and writing skills. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). The Parent coordinator at the school reach out to newly enrolled ELLs and their families to welcome them and inform them of the programs that are available at the school. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? N/A 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? N/A Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? All school personnel: administrators, teachers, related service providers and secretaries in the school will receive 7.5 hours required by NYS. The training will include information on how to support all different proficiency levels and SIFE students. The ENL teachers receives professional development through classes offered through the Office of English Language Learners, colleges, university and outside agencies that support English Language Learners. Some of the training topics that will be offered will focus on the following topics: The cognitive and psychosocial needs of our ELLs as they transition between early childhood, elementary, middle school and high school. Basic ELL background, the school ELL intake process, and initial language learning(phonemic awareness, phonics, vocabulary, and comprehension instructional strategies), academic vocabulary, childhood and adolescent development considerations, technology-based interventions, co-teaching, joint -ENLand classroom teacher goal- setting and monitoring, task complexity, levels of questioning, and using data such as NYSESLAT and periodic assessment data to drive ELL instruction. The professional development dates are November 3, 30, December 14, January 4, 25 th , February 8, 29, March th , April 4, May 16 and 23 rd . Teachers of ELLs will be offered professional development outside of the school building as well. The information collected from this training will be used to turn-key to the other staff members. Teachers will also receive training in the school on how to support ENL learners with the Common Core State Learning Standard. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include 2018-19 CEP 59  how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. Professional development will be offered to teachers on the cognitive and psychosocial needs of our ELLs as they transition between early childhood, elementary, middle school and high school. Professional development will be offered to all teachers and administrator in the school. Agendas, attendance and a copies of the certificates will be maintained in the school files of the total number of hours that teachers attend the training. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? A meeting is held to inform all ENL parents of their child's progress, the goals for the school year, and ways that the school is support ENL learners and families. Parents are notified of different programs that are available to them as well. In-house interpreters are also in the meeting. Meetings with the principal about student progress are also documented. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. On September 11, , 2015, Ell Parent Orientation, September 16, 2015 Ell Parent Orientation, September 17, 2015 ELL Parent Meeting, September 17, 2015 we held our Open House for Parents from 4:30 - 7:30. On September 22, we held our Dad's bring your child to school morning event. on September 25th we held our Principal Breakfast with Parents and on September 29, 2015, we held our Student and Author of the Month event with Principal/Assistant Principal/Parents/Students and Teachers. Every Tuesdays parents are invited to the school for homework help, information about the curriculum. Parent conferences and Principal's meeting with parents. October 15, 2015, Parent Workshop; Student/Author of the Month October 16, 2015, followed by a PTA Meeting; After School Performance for parents from our after school program, Principal/Parent Tea Party October 23, 2015; November 4-5, 2015, Parent Teacher Conference Parent Meeting- Expectations for every grade November 13, 2015, Student and Author of the Month Celebration, followed by our PTA meeting;November 13, 2015; Middle School Orientation for Middle School Parents November 17, 2015 2015 Principal Breakfast November 20, 2015; December 4, 2015 Student and Author of the Month Celebration with parents followed by our PTA meeting, December 9, 2015 How to Help My Child utilize the educational resources on-line; December 18th Parent/Principal Tea Chat January 8,2016; Student/Author of the Month Celebration followed by our PTA meeting; January 12. 2016 Parent Movie Afternoon; January 15, 2015; Mammogram Mobile Clinic for Parents; January 21, 2015 Arts and Craft for Parents with our Teachers; Principal Parent Breakfast, January 29, 2016; March 2-3, 2016, Parent Teacher Conference These are dates that are currently on our calendar, we have scheduled parent events through January. We will continue to work on February through June with the same intensity. Parent Engagement Monthly Rotating Schedule Tuesdays 2:30 – 3:10 pm School Year 2015-2016 Grades Week 1 Week 2 Week 3 Week 4 K and 2 Conferences With Parents Create Weekly Parent Newsletters and Update Parent Logs Conferences With Parents 1st Grade Parent Homework Workshop/ Student Work Celebrations and/or Awards Parent Homework Workshop/ Student Work Celebrations and/or Awards Conferences With Parents Create Weekly Parent Newsletters and Update Parent Logs Conferences With Parents 2018-19 CEP 60  4th Grade Conferences With Parents Parent Homework Workshop/ Student Work Celebrations and/or Awards Conferences With Parents Create Weekly Parent Newsletters and Update Parent Logs 3 and 5 Create Weekly Parent Newsletters and Update Parent Logs Conferences With Parents Parent Homework Workshop/ Student Work Celebrations and/or Awards Conferences With Parents Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Paste response here: 2018-19 CEP 61 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Daysi Garcia, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 CEP 62  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: PS 65 School DBN: 19K065 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Ms. Daysi Garcia Ms. Mandel Mrs. Vega Ms. Bellido Title Principal Assistant Principal Parent Coordinator ENL/Bilingual Teacher Mrs. Mercedez Duran Parent Ms. LaManno Teacher/Subject Area Mrs. Maraldo Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach Mr. Galassi School Counselor Ms. Joyce Stalling- Harte Ms. Bernadette Fitzgerald Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Brookyn North Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 10/29/15 5/25/16 10/29/15 5/25/16 10/29/15 5/25/16 10/29/15 1/1/01 1/1/01 10/29/15 10/29/15 10/29/15 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 2018-19 CEP 63  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 19K065 School Name: PS 65 Superintendent: Ms. The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No (*Primary) * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. P.S. 065 is a K-5 school that serves the community with a large number of parents who speaks a language other than English at home. The majority of the population is Spanish speaking. This diversity ensures an atmosphere rich with culture for our students but can also present many challenges in terms of communicating with parents. P.S. 065 strives to eliminate communicational barriers between parents, teachers and administrators. In order to assess our school's written translation and oral interpretation needs to ensure that all parents are provided with appropriate and timely information in a language that they can understand, we used background information on our ELLs population, observation of actual beginning of the year registration and review of the HLIS for the ELLs in our program. We then tabulated the number of parents that spoke languages other than English and determined that there was a need for translation of notices and information about a child's academic performance, ways to increase student achievement and enhance the parents' understanding of academic standards, assessments and tests. We also provide information on parent communication needs in the Language Allocation Plan for the school. The ESL teacher confer with the parents by telephone, and in one to one conferences on their individual 2018-19 CEP 64  communication needs. The Home Language Identification Survey, Student Emergency Contact cards and the parent surveys were also used to collect data on the different languages of our students and their families. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Language The preference language for both written and oral communication of parents of student at PS 65 is English, Spanish, Chinese, Bengali, Arabic and Haitian Creole. 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be How do you plan to translate? Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to Families The welcome letter from the principal and teachers were sent home at the beginning of the year. Monthly calendars from the school which are prepared by the parent cordinator are prepared in Spanish and English. Weekly homework and classroom calendars are prepared in both languages. After school forms, extended day letters, any and all school activities such as parent conferences/open house, school uniform policy, homework policy, candy sales, book sales, half of day notices, teacher meetings with parents, principal breakfast, tea parties with parents, picture day notices, PTA meetings, 2018-19 CEP 65  school leadership meetings, parent workshops…… all notices are sent out in both English and Spanish. English Language Learners receives the following letters: Continued Entitlement Letters , Entitlement, Placements, Parent orientation and meetings and transitional letters. PTA notices for meetings are sent home several days before the meeting. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide interpretation service(s)? On September 11, , 2015, Ell Parent Orientation, September 16, 2015 Ell Parent Orientation, September 17, 2015 ELL Parent Meeting, September 17, 2015 we held our Open House for Parents from 4:30 - 7:30. On September 22, we held our Dad's bring your child to school morning event. on September 25 th we held our Principal Breakfast with Parents and on September 29, 2015, we held our Student and Author of the Month event with Principal/Assistant Principal/Parents/Students and Teachers. Every Tuesdays parents are invited to the school for homework help, informatio about the curriculum. Parent conferences and principal's meeting with parents. October 15, 2015, Parent Workshop; Student/Author of the Month October 16, 2015, followed by a PTA Meeting; After School Performance for parents from our after school program, Principal/Parent Tea Party October 23, 2015; November 4-5, 2015, Parent Teacher Conference Parent Meeting- Expectations for every grade November 13, 2015, Student and Author of the Month Celebration, followed by our PTA meeting;November 13, 2015; Middle School Orientation for Middle 2018-19 CEP 66  School Parents November 17, 2015 2015 Principal Breakfast November 20, 2015; December 4, 2015 Student and Author of the Month Celebration with parents followed by our PTA meeting, December 9, 2015 How to Help My Child utilize the educational resources on-line; December 18 th Parent/Principal Tea Chat January 8,2016; Student/Author of the Month Celebration followed by our PTA meeting; January 12. 2016 Parent Movie Afternoon; January 15, 2015; Mamogram Mobile Clinic for Parents; January 21, 2015 Arts and Craft for Parents with our Teachers; Principal Parent Breakfast, January 29, 2016; March 2-3, 2016, Parent Teacher Conference These are dates that are currently on our calendar, we have scheduled parent events through January. We will continue to work on February through June with the same intensity. Parent Engagement Monthly Rotating Schedule Tuesdays 2:30 – 3:10 pm School Year 2015-2016 Grades Week 1 Week 2 Week 3 Week 4 K and 2 Conferences With Parents Create Weekly Parent Newsletters and Update Parent Logs Conferences With Parents 1 st Grade Parent Homework Workshop/ Student Work Celebrations and/or Awards Parent Homework Workshop/ Student Work Celebrations and/or Awards Conferences With Parents Create Weekly Parent Newsletters and Update Parent Logs Conferences With Parents 2018-19 CEP 67  4 th Grade Conferences With Parents Parent Homework Workshop/ Student Work Celebrations and/or Awards Conferences With Parents Create Weekly Parent Newsletters and Update Parent Logs 3 and 5 Create Weekly Parent Newsletters and Update Parent Logs Conferences With Parents Parent Homework Workshop/ Student Work Celebrations and/or Awards Conferences With Parents 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) The Welcome poster is posted at the entrance of the school. The Parent's Bill of Rights, Parents' Guide to Language Access and Language ID Guide are displayed at the security desk and main office. School schedules are posted in both languages and Parent Guides are available in both languages in the main office. Middle School Directories/Pre-K and Kindergarden are also offered in both languages. Citiwide Behavioral Expectations as well as Gifted and Talented Manuals are also available in both languages. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services 2018-19 CEP 68  Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? P.S. 065K has an open door policy on parents' concerns and feedback. The parent coordinator is available to meet with any parent and listen to their concerns. Parents are encouraged at all parent meeting to send in notes, in either language, to call and to meet regularly with teachers. Parents are assured that their needs will be addressed in either language. School aides, parent coordinator. secretaries, paraprofessionals, administrative staff, and bi-lingual teachers are always made available for translation needs. 2018-19 CEP 69 
