2018-19 COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (CEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): School Name: 18K066 P.S. 66 Principal: LUCILLE JACKSON 2018-19 CEP 1  Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 CEP 2  School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information PS/IS 66 331800010066 Pre-K to Grade 8 School Number (DBN): 18K066 845 E. 96 th Street, Brooklyn, NY 11236 718-922-3505 718-922-3105 Phone Number: Fax: Patrick C. Petot ppetot@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Email Address: Lucille Jackson Maria Gallo Asia Thompson Kenneth Stevens Kenneth Stevens N/A N/A Kiesha Short (NYEDGE) District Information Geographical District: 18 Beverly A. Wilkins Superintendent: 1106 E. 85 th Street, Brooklyn, NY 11236 Superintendent’s Office Address: BWilkin@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718-566-6008 Phone Number: 718-694-7074 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) 2018-19 CEP 3  South Brooklyn Team 2 Mauriciere de Govia FSC: Executive Director’s Office Address: Executive Director: 415 89 th Street or 1106 E. 85 th Street, Brooklyn, NY MDegovi@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 718-759-4862 Phone Number: 718-630-1633 Fax: 2018-19 CEP 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Lucille Jackson Maria Gallo Asia Thompson JenniferEppolito Crystal King *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) KieshaShort (NYEDGE) CBO Representative, if applicable Simone Goss Crystal King Roxanne Hendrickson Member/Parent Member/Parent Member/Parent 2018-19 CEP 5  Name Kenneth Stevens LucreshaHusbands Ivy Spilberg Althea Walker ScarlettDemchak Rhonda Pitts Michael Donzelli Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Member/Parent Member/Parent Member/Parent Member/Teacher Member/Teacher Member/Teacher Member/Teacher Member/Teacher Member/Teacher 2018-19 CEP 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with 2018-19 CEP 7  the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement 2018-19 CEP 8  Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? P.S./I.S. 66 is dedicated to the achievement of excellence and high standards for all youngsters. With attention to the cognitive, emotional, physical, social, and creative domains of development we believe all students can achieve success in a supportive and structured learning environment. All members of the school community will work in a collaborative effort to ensure each student has the resources and support to face the challenges of school and demonstrate qualities of good citizenship and character. We will acknowledge and recognize the achievements of our students and the staff members and parents who enabled their success. 2018-19 CEP 9  2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. PS/IS 66K is a Pre-K to Grade 8 school located in the northern section of Canarsie, Brooklyn. The school’s current enrollment is 814 students comprised of 88.3% Black, 7% Hispanic, 2.6% White, and the other remaining percent spread out over Asian, Multi-Racial, American-Indian or Alaskan Native ethnicities. PS/IS 66K female to male ratio is 53% to 47% respectively. In addition, the school population includes English as a New Language (ENL's) and students with disabilities in both self-contained and Integrated Co-Teaching (ICT) classrooms. PS/IS 66K occupies a relatively new facility built in 2002 with an on-site computer laboratory, junior high school science laboratory, library, 300-plus seat auditorium, and gymnasium. The school also has an expansive playground with multiple basketball courts, separate playground for Early Childhood students, and an athletic turf field. In addition, the school worked this past school year with the Mayor's office, NYC Soccer Initiative, and USA Soccer to have the tennis court turned into a soccer pitch. Beginning in Kindergarten through Grade 8, the school has established a “Scholar’s” program, whereby students who have demonstrated high academic achievement on an admissions test and are recommended by their classroom teacher are identified for entrance. Students are grouped heterogeneously in the other classrooms on grade level, including grade 8. In addition, starting in 2013-2104, the school welcomed a District 75 school (P771) which serves students with autism ranging from Kindergarten to Grade 3. PS/IS 66K is proud to take part in the Mayor’s Middle School Initiative, and in collaboration with NYEDGE (formally known as Sports and Arts in Schools Foundation), we provide a daily, five days a week, after school program for our middle school students. A generous budget allocation of $1.5 million dollars allows our students to take part in programs to improve their academics, engage in arts enrichment opportunities, skills driven sports, fitness activities, and leadership courses throughout the school year. The school completed our fourth year of the initiative and have been granted a continuation of services for another year which greatly benefits our middle school students. Based on our 2017-2018 Quality Review, we received a rating of well-developed in three of the indicators - 3.1 (Goals and Action Plans), 3.4 (High Expectations), and 4.1 (Teacher Support and Supervision). We received proficient ratings in all other indicators. To further this progress, we are focusing on the following areas for the 2018-2019 school year, as aligned with the Framework For Great Schools: 1) To improve the performance of all students on the New York State ELA and Math assessments; 2) To improve our school-wide program for supporting students' social and emotional growth through Restorative Practices; 3) To increase the quality of rigorous instruction through the continuing review, analysis, revision, and implementation of unit plans and end-of-unit performance tasks; 4) To improve the number of teachers taking on leadership roles within our school; 5) To increase our parent participation in workshops, meetings, and events. Embedded within each of our goals is our ongoing emphasis on trust, openness, and communication. Without the trust of all of our constituents (teachers, staff, parents, and students), we would not be the school we are today. We incorporate the values of transparency, shared leadership, a respect for all voices, and a commitment to providing a well-rounded, standards-based education to all our students. We believe that the underlying trust we have created and continue to nourish and support will drive our success in the future. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. The school currently has three self-contained bridge classrooms for students with disabilities in the elementary school and junior high school (grades 1/2, 3/4, and 7/8). We provide our junior high school students a modified flexible programming model for specific periods each day to prepare them for high school. We also have Integrated Co-Teaching (ICT) classrooms in grades 1, 4, 5, 6, and 7. These students need varying levels of support for our providers (counselor, speech, therapists, OT and PT specialists, etc.). In order to meet these important needs, the school has increased the number of students receiving academic intervention services (AIS) by adding more part-time providers, 2018-19 CEP 10  adding a part-time speech provider, adding a part-time ENL provider, and we hired a second guidance counselor in 2016-2017 to provide additional support to our students. For both our ENL and special needs students to succeed, we work diligently to ensure our teachers are informed about best practices for the classroom to drive the education of these children. Our teachers receive professional learning about academic and behavior interventions (when necessary), as well as supports for non-English speakers. P771 continues to be an effective, collaborative partner with a wonderful program for students with autism. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. P.S./I.S. 66 continues to make gains on the New York State Common Core English Language Arts and Mathematics assessments for grade 3-8 students. We value individual student achievement and we work closely with our District 18 peers to provide a cohesive learning experience that is competitive with high school, college, and career readiness. For the first time, P.S./I.S. 66 in 2016-2017 provided our Grade 8 students the opportunity to prepare and take the Grade 9 Living Environment Regents exam and we were extremely proud that 97% of the students received a passing score on the exam. This year, all students (100%) received a passing score. For the 2018-2019 school year, we are adding the Grade 9 Algebra and Global History regents. P.S./I.S 66 is proud to take part in the District 18 Mathematics initiative which allows our Grade 2 teacher team to participate in a yearlong Professional Learning Community with other schools in our district to deepen mathematical content knowledge, teaching strategies, and professional discourse their Grade 2 teaching peers. Also, our school assistant principals participate in the District 18 Professional Learning Community that provides guidance and support to craft high leverage feedback to improve and strengthen math instructional practice of our Grade 2 teacher team. For the second year, we are an Algebra For All school as well. In addition, one of our teachers has been accepted into the New York City Department of Education Leadership in Education Apprentice Program (LEAP) for the 2018-19 school year and will be working closely with the school principal to become a future school leader. PS/IS 66 has received a two-year grant from i3: Investing in Innovation - Whole School Restorative Practices Learning Pilot. In collaboration with Morningside Center, the school will use the 4R's curriculum to allow students to use Restorative Practices to address various issues that arise during the school day. By using restorative circles, students will be able to reflect and resolve conflict using non-judgemental communication by trained teacher facilitators. Beginning in September 2018, our school will program all grades (elementary and junior school) to devote identified periods each week for Restorative Practice circles, including Kindergarten students. Last year, our school made significant progress in all elements of the Framework For Great Schools. We increased the rigor in student writing by implementing more Writing-on-Demand opportunities for our students. We ensured that all staff members were trained in Restorative Justice as well as allowed for more teacher team meeting time to discuss program elements and effectiveness. We increased the number of periods given teachers each week to common plan, review and develop more rigorous unit plans and performance tasks, and analyze student data and work products. In addition, we strived to improve our community outreach to parents to better inform them of the diverse curricula their students are being exposed to on a daily/weekly/monthly basis. For the 2018-2019 school year, we will focus on the following: 1) To improve the performance of all students on the New York State ELA and Math assessments (Rigorous Instruction); 2) To improve our school-wide program for supporting students' social and emotional growth through Restorative Practice (Supportive Environment and Trust); 3) To increase the quality of rigorous instruction through the continuing review, analysis, revision, and implementation of unit plans and end-of-unit performance tasks (Collaborative Teachers); 4) To improve the number of teachers taking on leadership roles within our school (Effective School Leadership); 5) To increase our parent participation in workshops, meetings, and events thus strengthening our family and community ties (Strong Family-Community Ties) . 2018-19 CEP 11  2018-19 CEP 12  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 18K066 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration PK,0K,01,02,03,04,05,06,07,08 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 822 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 21 21 34 12 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 37 37 27 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 72.0% % Attendance Rate 62.9% % Reduced Lunch 2.9% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) 1.0% 7.9% 2.6% % Black or African American % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 8.17 0% 17% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 42.7% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 97% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A YES N/A NO YES Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A NO YES Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A YES High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 21 21 93.9% 7.9% 11.2% 87.2% 0.7% 1.6% 4 10% 5.9 45.1% 72% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No YES N/A N/A N/A YES YES N/A N/A N/A YES YES N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 CEP 13  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. The school has made gains in students meeting or exceeding proficiency on New York State ELA and Math assessments in recent years. Improvement in student performance continues to be a priority. An extensive, detailed analysis of the 2017-2018 NYS Common Core ELA and Mathematics assessment data was conducted by school administration to highlight special areas of strength and areas in need of additional focus to improve on the gains made. Based on the analysis of the 2017-2018 assessments, the school will continue to focus on improving performance of students who placed in the bottom third as well as work to improve writing in all content areas. In ELA, the school has made consistent improvement in student performance (percent of students meeting Level 3 and 4 proficiency) over a five-year period. A detailed analysis of student performance shows student writing proficiency continues to be an area of focus; especially those students who find themselves in the bottom third academically. In Mathematics, the school has made significant improvement in student performance from 2016-2017 to 2017-2018. Beginning in 2016-2017, the school identified student performance in completing (with accuracy) constructed response questions and developed a systematic approach to aligning our curriculum and teaching to addressing this need. Data sources include analysis of the 2017-2018 NYS Common Core ELA and Mathematics assessments, 2017-2018 student performance in On-Demand writing in grades 3-8, as well as student performance in mathematics performance tasks in the same grades. We provide our students in Grades 2-8 multiple opportunities to demonstrate mastery of content and skills through the administration of many varied assessments throughout the school year. Teachers use teacher-developed data analysis spreadsheets for each assessment to measure student performance as well as identify specific learning standards where additional focus is needed. This past year, our district highlighted our analysis of data to showcase our horizontal and vertical data teams to other schools as well as representatives from Department of Education. In addition, feedback from our 2017-2018 Quality Review identified our strength in using data from common assessments to adjust curricula and instruction. We will continue to support all students, especially those in need of academic intervention, the opportunity to receive academic assistance by using school budget resources to support two part-time Academic Intervention Service (AIS) providers for students in all grades, per-Diem teachers, and two part-time English as a New Language (ENL) providers. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified 2018-19 CEP 14  priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, the percent of students in Grades 4-8 who performed in the bottom third based on results from the 2018-2019 New York State Common Core ELA and Mathematics assessments will decrease by 10% as compared to their performance on the 2017-2018 New York State Common Core ELA and Mathematics assessments. 2018-19 CEP 15 Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Selected students in Grades 4-8. Monthly - October 2018 to June 2019. Teachers in Grades 4-8. School Leadership. Academic Intervention Service providers. Parent Coordinator. School Leadership. Teachers in Grades 4-8. All students in Grades 4-8. Monthly - October 2018 to April 2019. Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). The school will use two Academic Intervention Service (AIS) providers and two per-Diem providers to deliver services. The school will develop and implement a program for all students who scored in the bottom third on the 2017-2018 New York State (NYS) Common Core English Language Arts (ELA) and Math exams. AIS services will be provided in a pull-out and push-in program. Students will have the opportunity to be rotated in or out of AIS if performance on class/school formative assessments reflects sufficient growth has been made. The school will use Tuesday afternoon Inquiry sessions as well as during common planning periods and grade/department teams to analyze student work products, track student progress on assessment data provided by the school faculty, and develop instruction strategies to meet the needs of AIS students. The school will track student progress in English Language Arts (ELA) and Math performance by administering three assessments in October 2018, December 2018, and February 2019. Students are assessed using Common Core aligned test questions. Math assessments are designed to assess student mastery of Common Core standards/skills based on the New York State (NYS) Mathematics pacing calendar. In addition, performance tasks (in ELA and Mathematics) and Writing-On-Demand assessments (in ELA) are used to track progress. Teachers will inform parents of student growth using STAR360, Class Dojo, written progress reports, report cards, and during conferences. Also, teachers and AIS providers will utilize the Tuesday afternoon Family Engagement time, Parent/Teacher Conference sessions, as well as schedule individual parents meetings throughout the school year to meet with parents to review student progress . The school will also use STAR360 to assess reading comprehension and fluency three times a year for students in grades 4-8 and provide parents of the results of these assessments as well as materials and/or resources they can access to support their child at home. 2018-19 CEP 16  Special education, SETSS and ENL teachers will work with supervisors and literacy coach to develop strategies to improve student performance in ELA and mathematics for the students they service. Special Education, SETSS, and ENL Teachers Monthly - September 2018 to June 2018. School Leadership. The school will use all available resources to ensure all English as a New Language (ENL’s) students receive mandated support in English Language Arts and Mathematics. In addition, students in the self-contained, special education classroom will be considered for mainstreaming. Identified students in Grades 4-8. Monthly - September 2018 to November 2018. All students in Grades 3-8. Monthly - September 2018 to June 2019. The school will also continue for the 2018-2019 school year our use of the reading support program STAR360 for students in Grades 3-8. An analysis of the data from the 2017-2018 school year show that at least 95% of all students improved their reading comprehension and proficiency significantly from the beginning of the year. In mathematics, we will continue to highlight our use of performance tasks to serve as an additional end-of-unit assessment to better support student mastery of Common Core and Next Generation learning standards. School leaders and support staff will provide professional development and workshops for new teachers, as well as new teachers to their grade level, to help them analyze student/classroom/grade data to support their planning and instructional outcomes of students. These sessions will take place during Professional Development Mondays, during Inquiry meetings on Tuesdays, or during grade level common planning periods. Literacy Coach. School Leadership. Selected Teachers. Service Providers. School Leadership. Teachers in Grades 3-8. Service Providers. Literacy Coach. Supervisors will work with teachers one-on-one, through frequent cycles of observation, to give them actionable feedback on how well teachers are supporting the learning goals of their students, improving critical thinking skills, and use of data to influence planning and instruction. All teachers in Grades 4-8. Monthly - September 2018 to June 2019. School Leadership TRUST: Trust is established throughout this practice, as teachers understand that they are improvement partners with administration, in service of student success. Writing Consultant to support ELA writing instruction in grades 3-4. Teachers Grade 3 and 4 September - December 2018 School Leadership Instructional Coach Assistant Principal 2018-19 CEP 17 Students in Grades 2-8 will be administered a minimum of 6, maximum of 8, writing assessments to support students in writing constructed and extended response questions. The school will include multiple choice questions to these administrations after the third administration. Teachers Grades 2-8. October 2018 to April 2019 School Leadership Teachers Grades 2-8 Instructional Coach 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. The school will conduct a parent information session during the month of September to inform them of their child's expectations, grade curriculum, content to be learned during the school year in all subjects, materials students will be using, as well as dates for all Parent/Teacher Conferences during the school year. The school will also provide parents the opportunity to attend information sessions for students in the testing grades to better prepared their child for the NYS Common Core ELA and mathematics assessments. These testing sessions will take place beginning in January 2019 and continue throughout March 2019. Our providers will inform parents of student growth on STARS progress reports for students in grades 3 and 8. Teachers also use Jupiter Grades, Class DoJo, written progress reports, report cards, and conferences as another method to relay progress. School leadership, coach, parent coordinator, guidance counselors, service providers, and all Grade 4-8 teachers will be responsible for implementation. School leadership will provide oversight to ensure all parents have the necessary information, knowledge, and resources to effectively support their child. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Teachers will be provided with at least two common planning periods each week to meet with leadership, coaches, and other key personnel to review student work products, develop unit plans and/or pacing calendars. Adjusting teacher schedules or hiring day substitute teachers may be needed to ensure these common planning are provided. School administration will ensure all classrooms have all necessary instructional materials (such as leveled classroom libraries, student workbooks, teacher instructional guides, and subject specific support materials) and will purchase additional materials if needed at the beginning of the school year. In addition, each teacher will be provided a school laptop for instructional use. Use of the new technology lab will be available to all students/teachers in all grades. Additional materials for Students With Disabilities (SWD) and ENL students will be purchased to supplement instruction and Progress Monitor Student Benchmark Assessment books for students in Grades 1-8 will also be used. Two F-Status staff members will be hired to assist our two full-time staff members in providing additional academic intervention services in both ELA and Mathematics. These F-Status teachers will provide intervention services two times per week. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A 2018-19 CEP 18  C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 22, 2019, the school will monitor the progress for all identified students in the bottom third as measured by their performance on school-wide reading (STAR360) and writing (On-Demand Writing and multiple Constructed Response performance tasks) assessments in ELA and school-wide benchmark assessments in Mathematics administered during the first five months of the 2018-2019 school year. School leadership and teachers will analyze other data sources to measure student progress; such as end-of-unit tests, performance tasks, writing samples, and student performance on extended response questions in both ELA and Mathematics. Also, school leadership will meet with all service providers to analyze student performance (as well as students with disabilities and ENL's) and develop next steps/adjust instruction. Another data source to analyze in ELA will be data from the second school-wide ELA assessment which is also given in January 2019. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) STAR360 reading assessment, On-Demand Writing and Constructed Response assessments in ELA, and school-wide math assessments developed by the school's math team. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 19  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? It is our school vision that we are responsible for the whole child - both their academics and their social-emotional development. According to the 2017-2018 Quality Review, the reviewer noted that our school communicates high expectations (QR Indicator 3.4) to staff, students, and families, and provides supports to achieve these expectations which resulted in a rating of Well Developed. With that, the school would like to maintain our improvement in providing a culture of mutual trust and positive attitudes that supports the academic and personal growth of our students. A review of the 2017-2018 Online Incident Reporting System (OORS) shows that the school continues to see a decrease in the number of incidents involving rude, disrespectful behavior, harassment, and/or bullying and we are committed to continuing this progress. This year, we will continue using Restorative Practices and Interventions in all classrooms, in all grades. We are also adding a specific period two times a week where all elementary classrooms will be using Restorative Practice curriculum - as we programmed for our junior high school students this past year. Feedback from school staff and faculty provided to school leadership during the 2017-2018 school year, data from the 2016-2017 School Quality Guide, as well as from the 2016-2017 School Survey supports that improving student communication skills, building empathy between and among students, and providing additional guidance validate our efforts. We are encouraged with the decrease of reported incidents and look forward to receiving positive feedback from the release of the 2017-2018 School Quality Guide and School Survey. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, the school will have an at least 10% decrease in the number of incidents reported that pertain to rude, disrespectful behavior, harassment, and/or bullying between students as compared to 2017-2018 data on the Online Occurrence Reporting System (OORS). 2018-19 CEP 20  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? The school will continue using Restorative Practices for students in Grades K-8 using 4R's curriculum materials that focuses on building and fostering empathy among students as well as building better, positive communication skills between students and to adults. All Students. Weekly - October 2018 to June 2019 School guidance counselors will support the program throughout the year, by meeting with teachers and students. All Students. All Teachers. Weekly - Sept. 2018 to June 2019. School leadership. All Teachers. Parent Coordinator. School Leadership. Guidance Counselors. Selected staff members (teachers, support staff and administrators) not already trained in Restorative Practices will receive professional development in Restorative Intervention Training during the months of September, October, and November. School paraprofessionals will also be trained to specifically assist the needs of students with disabilities. In addition, the school will work with the school-assigned Restorative Practices Staff Developer to assess the program's implementation and meet with the school's Restorative Intervention Executive Leadership Team on a weekly basis to assess progress of the program's initiatives. The Staff Developer will meet as least once a month with each grade team to assess program implementation and progress. Common planning time will be scheduled on each grade level to provide opportunities for teachers to meet and share best Selected teachers in Grades K-8 Monthly - Sept. 2018 to November 2018. School Leadership. Staff Developer. All Teachers Monthly - School Leadership October 2018-19 CEP 21 practices on the implementation and effectiveness of Restorative Practices 2018 to June 2019. At the beginning of the 2018-2019 school year, students will be asked to complete a survey of questions on school culture and tone. Based on student responses, the school will identify three behaviors to track based on results of two additional surveys provided to students during the school year. All Teachers. All Students. Monthly - School Leadership. October 2018 to November 2018. Guidance Counselors. School Dean. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Beginning in September 2018, the school will conduct a kick-off meeting with parents during the September "Curriculum Night" to inform them of the school's initiative in Restorative Practices. Parents will also be provided detailed progress reports on student progress in the program (as well as in academic subject areas) at least three times throughout the school year. School principal, assistant principals, guidance counselors, and dean will be responsible for implementation and oversight. The school will provide parents a detailed written overview of the program to be "backpacked" home as well as a kick-off meeting with parents at the beginning of the 2018-2019 school year outlining the program and the school's vision for success in implementing Restorative Practices. Also, the school will provide updates on the program to parents during our monthly PA meetings as well as to our School Leadership Team. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. The school will continue to provide school faculty professional development opportunities in strategies for implementing Restorative Practices in the classrooms. Substitute teachers may have to be hired/assigned so that teachers identified can attend off-site professional development if needed. In addition, middle school teachers will be given the opportunity to volunteer their administrative period assignments to supervise the "Reflection Room." Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 2018-19 CEP 22  By February 15, 2019, the school will analyze data from the 2018-2019 On-Line Occurrence Reporting System (OORS) reports to assess progress as compared to data from 2017-2018 occurrence reports. In addition, other data sources will also be analyzed (i.e. Morningside data collection reports, teacher discipline referrals, reflection room logs, faculty surveys, etc.) to assess progress towards meeting the annual goal and whether adjustments to the action plan is needed. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. OORS incident reports, Dean parent contact logs/notes, Reflection Room logs, Morningside data collection reports, student survey, and feedback to school leadership from faculty. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 23  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. In our 2017-2018 Quality Review, the school was highlighted for having coherent curricula for a diversity of learners and students have access to the curricula and tasks that are cognitively engaging through a variety of differentiated supports. This is a testament to the dedication of teachers to constantly review and reflect on the effectiveness of their instruction and to make adjustments, when necessary, to their instructional goals. In addition, the 2017-2018 Principal Performance Review summary provided by the superintendent mentioned that our school curricula are aligned to Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS) and coherent standards and are strategically integrated to the instructional shifts. In both reports, the school received "Proficient" ratings and will work to improve the quality of our instruction. In the 2016-2017 Principal Performance Review, the school also received a "Proficient" rating for curriculum and instruction. Based on the data trend reflected in the 2017-2018 Quality Review and the 2017-2018 Principal Performance Review highlighted above, as also reflected in the 2016-2017 Principal Performance Review as well, the school has identified as a priority need for teacher teams to work collaboratively to better develop more differentiated unit plans and lessons to improve the level of instructional rigor in our classrooms. Embedded within this priority need is for the school to provide more opportunities for teacher teams to collaboratively work together to review, revise, and develop unit plans and performance tasks that meet the diverse learning abilities of our students. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, all teachers in Grades K-5 will work collaboratively to develop rigorous CCLS-aligned units of study and performance tasks in ELA and Mathematics to improve rigorous instruction as measure by the development of five (5) units of study in ELA and ten (10) performance tasks in Mathematics. 2018-19 CEP 24  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Develop and implement a school program that allows for for teachers to meet in teacher teams to common plan, unit plan, curriculum map, and develop/review subject pacing calendars at least twice a week. All K-5 Teachers. Continue teacher professional development and knowledge of the components of effective Project Based Learning and their incorporation into unit plans in order to provide our students a more diverse/engaging learning opportunity. All K-5 Teachers Continue the implementation of targeted Performance Tasks, especially in mathematics, to strengthen student performance on all assessments. All K-5 Teachers. Weekly - September 2018 to November 2018. Monthly - September 2018 to June 2019. Weekly - September 2018 to June 2019. School leadership will review completed unit plans to ensure teacher teams are differentiating instruction so that all student groups - especially students with disabilities and ENL's - are being effectively addressed in their instructional planning/delivery. All K-5 Teachers Monthly - October 2018 to May 2019. School Leadership. School Leadership. School Leadership. School Leadership. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. School will inform parents through parent meetings, notices "backpacked" home, newsletters, and via email of content/subject material being taught in the classroom currently as well as in the coming months. Course and subject information regarding material/content being covered in the classrooms will be delivered via our on-line information system, Class Dojo and Jupiter Grades, as well as at our multiple Parent/Teacher Conference dates throughout the school year. The first Parent/Teacher Conference date in September 2018 serves as an excellent vehicle to inform parents our course curriculum objectives for the school year. There will also be a series of Title 1 parental involvement workshops organized by the Parent Association. Principal, Assistant Principals, Teachers, Parent-Coordinator, and other staff members will be responsible for implementation and oversight. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment 2018-19 CEP 25  Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. The school will provide teachers the opportunity to attend on and off-site professional development and use substitute teachers when necessary to cover classrooms. The school schedule will be organized and developed so that teachers can have as many as two common planning periods per week to meet as teacher teams to review standards, develop unit/lesson plans, analyze student/class performance data, and review student work products. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, all grade teacher teams will have completed and submitted for review/approval at least three (3) units in ELA and five (5) performance tasks in mathematics. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Teacher prepared ELA units plans and Mathematics performance tasks. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 26  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. After the most recent 2017-2018 Quality Review, the school received a "Proficient" rating for indicator 4.2 - Teacher Teams and Leadership Development. Other additional evidence to support the need for improvement was on our 2016-2017 School Quality Guide, we received an 82% in the section on teacher influence over policy and a "Proficient" rating for the section "How well do teachers work together." As outlined in the Framework for Great Schools, distributive leadership is an important component and contributor to improving organizational and instructional outcomes. Therefore, more teachers will be given opportunities to assume leadership roles within our school. As a priority, identified teachers will serve in leadership positions that include: model teacher on each grade in Kindergarten to Grade 4, departmentalized content leaders, Restorative Practice leadership team, professional development team leaders, grade team district partners, and ICT model classrooms with a focus on differentiated strategies and students with disabilities. Teacher leaders with meet with administration to review and revise goals and action plan. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, through school leadership and initiative, 20% of the teaching faculty will be asked to serve in leadership roles that support our teachers in the enhancement of content knowledge and pedagogical skill as compared to Advance ratings in Danielson's Framework for Teaching (4e) from 2017-2018. 2018-19 CEP 27  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? School leadership will review 2018-2019 needs and programs to look for areas in which teacher leaders could emerge throughout the school year, in order to promote distributive leadership. All teaching faculty. School leadership will consult with team leaders to ensure their work is in alignment with the school and it's vision. Additionally, school leadership will share what their teams are working on and their findings through the creation of newsletters, "Share" workshops on Professional Development Mondays, and team leaders will have opportunities to visit other teams. All teaching faculty. School Leadership will make sure that teams have access to a wide variety of resources they can use in order to ensure that they systematically analyze key elements of classroom practice and strategically focus on deficiency standards in ELA and math. All teaching faculty. One purpose of the vertical teams is to ensure cohesion across grade levels and classrooms. Therefore, we will continue to utilize Inquiry Team protocols as a tool in which minutes, agendas, and presentations are recorded and made accessible to all staff at all times. All Teaching Faculty Monthly - September 2018 to November 2018. Monthly - September 2018 to June 2019. Monthly - September 2018 to April 2019. Weekly - October 2018 to June 2019. School Leadership. School Leadership. School Leadership. School Leadership. All Teachers. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. At school leadership team meetings, Parent Association meetings, and notices home (either via electronic means or traditional backpack), the school will inform parents of initiatives and learning opportunities being provided to the staff. These notices occur on a monthly basis and school leadership will be responsible for its implementation and oversight. Parents, along with school leadership, will develop relationships with community-based organizations and provide opportunities for parents to assume leadership roles by presenting workshops to the school community on topics in which they can share their knowledge and expertise. 2018-19 CEP 28  Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. School leadership, classroom teachers, cluster teachers, all service providers, professional development/learning cycles, common preps, team meetings, per Diem, per session. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, school leadership will compare Advance data from 2017-2018 as well as with data entered for the 2018-2019 school year to ensure at least 10% of the teaching faculty have served in leadership positions in our school. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Danielson's Framework For Teaching (4e) in Advance. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 29  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Our school has a strong relationship with our parents and we provide many opportunities for our parents to come to our school to observe and take part in the accomplishments, talents, and academic successes of our students. We continually seek to improve the participation of parents as well as value their feedback on the education and programs we provide. In the 2016-2017 School Quality Guide, our school scored below the city average for Strong Family and Community Ties. Specifically, we received a score of 89% regarding outreach to parents and a score of 87% on parent involvement in school. In another report, the 2016-2017 School Quality Snapshot, 82% of parents stated that school staff regularly communicate with them about how parents can help their child learn. This percentage was also below the city average. Our goal for the 2018-2019 school year is to significantly improve our family and community outreach and create a lasting partnership with our parents. For the 2017-2018 school year, the school scored an 92% (an improvement of 3% from the previous year) regarding outreach to parents and scored 88% on parent involvement in schools (an improvement of 1% from 206-2017) on the 2017-2018 School Quality Guide. The school, however, is still 1% below the district and city averages in these measures. Improvement continues to be a focus and will develop and implement new and inventive approaches to meet our goal. The school will also attempt to vary our times to hold parent meetings, provide workshops, conduct school celebration events. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, we will increase parent participation by 7% in parent engagement events, including but not limited to Parent Association meetings, Parent/Teacher Conferences, Family Engagement Tuesdays, parent workshops, and other curriculum-based workshops held throughout the school year as measured by parent attendance statistics for 2018-2019 compared to 2017-2018. 2018-19 CEP 30  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Monthly - September 2018 to June 2019. School Leadership. Classroom Teachers.  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Teachers will collaboratively plan and develop a calendar of parent workshops/events pertinent to their grades Parents and Guardians. A Parent-Teacher Team will be created to develop and promote new ways to increase parent participation. In addition, the school will look to provide parents the opportunity to present at workshops to the school community based on their expertise. Promote relationships with community-based organizations to provide parents with information and resources that focus on academic and non-academic issues. This focus could be on nutrition, health, CPR, safety, and stress reduction. Students. Parents and Guardians. Teachers. Community-based Organizations. Parents and Guardians. Students. Monthly - September 2018 to December 2018. Monthly - September 2018 to June 2019. Grade/Department team leaders. School Leadership. Parent-Teacher Team. Parent Coordinator. Parent Experts. School Leadership. Parent-Teacher Team. Community-based Organizations (CBOs) School Leadership. ENL teachers and Special Education providers will offer workshops for parents/guardians to explain the IEP process, parent rights, and English-language learner related topics. Parents and Guardians. Monthly - September 2018-19 CEP 31  2018 to June 2019. ENL Providers. Students. (as needed) We will provide opportunities for students to take part in student-led conferences during Parent/Teacher Conferences, Family Engagement Tuesdays, and during other non-formal times. Students will use this time to share with their parents their work, content portfolios, and projects as well as having productive conversations about their academic progress. The Parent-Teacher Team and Parent Coordinator will communicate opportunities for parents by sending out surveys in order to receive constructive feedback on future parent/family events. All Teachers. Parents and Guardians. Students. Parents and Guardians. Translation services and/or parent language sponsor volunteers will be made available during meetings and parent workshops to further support our families. Parents and Guardians. Monthly - November 2018 to May 2019. Special Education Teachers. School Leadership. All Teachers. Monthly - September 2018 to January 2019. School Leadership. Parent Coordinator. Parent-Teacher Team. School Leadership. ENL Providers. Monthly - September 2018 to June 2019. (as needed) Translators/Volunteers. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. Sports and Arts in School's Foundation (SASF) is currently in our school providing our after school program for our junior high school students. We will seek out other community-based organizations and other partnerships on various subjects/topics from September 2018 to June 2019 to increase parent participation. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 2018-19 CEP 32  School leadership, classroom teachers, cluster teachers, teacher teams, parent coordinator, scheduling for monthly and/or bi-monthly meetings, per Diem, per session, materials for events, and translation services. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA Title II, Part A SIG X PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, the school will review parent sign-in logs, attendance numbers at school events, and participation figures from workshops/family engagement events and improve by 3% as measured by parent attendance statistics since the beginning of the 2018-2019 school year. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Parent attendance statistics comparing from September 2018 to February 2019. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 33  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) ●Teacher Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) ●Phonics/Phonemic ●Small group During the school day Recommendation Awareness Instruction ●Fountas and Instruction ●Push in/Pull out Pinnell Benchmark ● Building Assessments and Vocabulary (Prefix, STAR360 for Suffix, Analogies) students in Grades ●Read Aloud 1-8 ●Shared /Modeled ●Anecdotal Notes Writing ●Classroom ●Text Annotation Performance ● Lack of reading readiness/early literacy skills ●Scored below proficiency (Level 1 & Level 2 on NYS Assessment in the 2018-19 CEP 34  Mathematics prior year) for students in Grades 3-8 ●Writing Samples ●Report Card indicators (Previous year’s) ●Beginning of Year(BOY) Diagnostic Assessments (STAR360) ESL Performance ● Teacher ●Draw a Picture/ ●Small group Recommendation Diagrams Instruction ● Report Card ●Act it out ●Push in/Pull out indicators (Previous ● Guess and Check year’s) ●Make an ●Classroom Organized List Performance ● Discover a Pattern ● Pearson’s Math ●Set the purpose Assessments(End of for a topic Year) Math ●Mental Math Assessment) ●Create a “Cheat ●Scored below Sheet” – All formulas, proficiency (Level 1 & keywords, common Level 2 on New York procedures, etc.) State Assessment in ● Use of During the school day 2018-19 CEP 35  Science the prior year) for manipulatives students in Grades ● Building 3-8 Vocabulary ● BOY Diagnostic ● Math Talk (Teacher Assessment or Student Led) ● Anecdotal Notes ● Teacher recommendation anchored in data ● Level 1 or Level 2on NYS Science Assessment (Grade 5 students) Within the classrooms, teachers will differentiate instruction to meet the needs of all levels of learners. The Content Reading in Social Studies and Science , published by Continental Press, is delivered daily during small group instruction. This program consists of in-depth articles about curriculum related issues in Science. Within the classrooms, teachers will differentiate instruction to meet the needs of all levels of learners. The Content Reading in Social Studies and Science , published by Continental Press, is delivered daily during small group instruction. This program consists of in-depth articles about curriculum related issues in Social Studies. ● The school Daily classroom instruction During the school day Daily classroom instruction During the school day Daily (all) During the school day (all) Social Studies ● Teacher recommendation anchored in data ● Level 1 or Level 2 on 2017-2018 NYS ELA Assessment At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, ● Students 2018-19 CEP 36  School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) identified for guidance counselors mandated services workwith students outlined in their IEP in small groups ● Teacher and/or an individual recommendation setting one to two based on classroom times a week for 30 observation and to 40 minute performance sessions. Strategies ●Recommendation are discussed and by parent/ guardian implemented to help students improve the academic performance, their self-concepts, to take pride in their work and achievement, to accept mistakes, and to develop an understanding of how to learn from these mistakes. ● The school psychologist meets with students on an as needed basis 2018-19 CEP 37  through teacher recommendation and parent request. ● The school social worker meets with students on an individual basis to help them deal with emotional problems that interfere with the learning process. 2018-19 CEP 38  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 25 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. Students in temporary housing are given the opportunity to receive free school supplies as well as uniforms so that may be successful in school. The school also provides guidance counseling services to both students and parents on an as needed basis. The school's use of Restorative Practices provides additional supports within the classroom to help these students with their social/emotional growth. Classroom teachers also use targeted grouping in their lesson to meet the academic needs of all students. Lastly, the school works with families to provide temporary housing students the opportunity to take part in all after school programs. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 CEP 39  N/A 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. N/A 2018-19 CEP 40  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. The administration in collaboration with the human resources department with the NYC Department of Education will make every effort to ensure that every classroom/program has a highly qualified teacher. In addition, the school will make every effort to consider for employment only those candidates that possess the appropriate NYS license and/or certifications for any teaching vacancy. The school will also use Teacher Finder and the ATR excess list from the NYC DOE to find highly qualified teachers to fill vacancies. New teachers will be provided a mentor to assist them with understanding the key components of the schools curriculum, how to develop data-driven lesson plans, effective classroom management strategies, parent communication and parental involvement methods, and assist in providing outlets for finding additional/effective resources to improve their teaching practice. School administration will assist new teachers in understanding the evaluation process as well as provide target professional development on Danielson's Framework for Teaching and the NYC Framework for Great Schools. In addition, the school will promote any staff member who wishes to pursue National Board Certification (NBC) as well as work closely with those staff members working to complete their probationary periods in preparation for tenure. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). Teachers will be offered opportunities to attend workshops, conferences, professional seminars, online webinars, and college courses that enhance their content knowledge and pedagogical skill. When possible, these activities will be funded by Title 1 Set Aside funds and other available grants. Grade 2 teachers will take part in a yearlong District 18 Professional Learning Community with their peers across the district to deepen mathematical content, strategies, discourse and strengthen conceptual knowledge of Grade 2 CCLS Math. 2018-19 CEP 41  Assistant principals will also take part in a District 18 Assistant Principal Institute that provides guidance and support AP's on how to craft high leverage feedback to improve and strengthen math instructional practice for teachers. School principal participates in a District 18 Principal Leadership and Think Tank series to learn ELA and Math researched based instructional practice/strategies to improve student outcomes. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). With the implementation of a new comprehensive ELA curriculum, Journey's, started at the beginning of the 2016-2017 school year, students in early childhood grades promoted to the next grade are familiar with the school’s reading program as well its program requirements. In addition, students will continue to become more familiar with taking Performance Based Assessments as a basis for determining one factor for student achievement in both reading and writing. The school also assesses student performance in ELA and Mathematics in Grades 1 and 2 using STAR360, Journey's unit assessments, EnVisions mathematics unit tests, Fountas and Pinnell reading assessment, Fundations interventions for at-risk students, Performance Tasks, and Project Based Learning activities. Parents of students in all grades, but especially those in early childhood, are encouraged to attend information meetings with their child’s teacher at the beginning of the school year for the purpose of gaining basic knowledge regarding the various curricula offered at the school as well as the academic intervention services available to all students. All parents are encouraged to attend monthly PA meetings as well as School Leadership Team meetings so that they can receive information regarding the early childhood curricula, activities, programs, and events taking place at the school so that they can better support their child’s education. 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments 2018-19 CEP 42  Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. Teachers will meet during their common preps as well as during Collaborative Team Meeting time to reflect, review, and/or adjust end of unit assessments to be administered in the classroom. These teacher-prepared assessments will help support instruction. In addition, school leadership will meet monthly with grade/department leaders to assess class and grade data. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Title I Part A (Basic) Federal Title II, Part A Federal Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Federal Federal Tax Levy (FSF) Local 1Explanation/Background: 474,723.00 23,058.00 0 0 4,634,839.00 X X N/A N/A X 2018-19 CEP 43 Column B Section Reference(s) Referenced in sections 5a Part 3, 5b Part 3, 5c Part 3, 5d Part 3, and 5e Part 3. Referenced in Sections 5a Part 3, 5b Part 3, 5c Part 3, 5d Part 3, and 5e Part 3. N/A N/A Referenced in sections 5a Part 3, 5b Part 3, 5c Part 3, 5d Part 3, and 5e Part 3.  Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities 2018-19 CEP 44  funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 CEP 45  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent Involvement Policy (PIP) Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. P.S./I.S. 66, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. PS/IS 66K will support parents and families of Title I students by: ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; 2018-19 CEP 46  ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● conduct parent workshops for the Scholars program to empower parents with strategies that will enable them to nurture their intelligence; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in 2018-19 CEP 47  the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the ESSA; ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● The Parent Coordinator will establish and maintain list serve email communication to update and inform parents of school-wide activities and initiatives, as well as serving as a communication tool for parents to reach out via email to the Parent Coordinator; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress;  encourage parents to utilize the Tuesday afternoon Family Engagement time to meet with teachers to discuss  student progress; send home monthly reminders for parents to have their email addresses updated and/or added to the school database in order to receive notices from the school regarding events or programs offered by the school; ● strengthening the home school connection through utilization of JUPITER, Class DoJo, and other online communication tools that allows teachers to communication directly with parents about their individual child’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. 2018-19 CEP 48  Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● conduct parent workshops for the Scholars program to empower parents with strategies that will enable them to nurture their intelligence; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the ESSA; ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; 2018-19 CEP 49  ● The Parent Coordinator will establish and maintain list serve email communication to update and inform parents of school-wide activities and initiatives, as well as serving as a communication tool for parents to reach out via email to the Parent Coordinator; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; BY: Parental Involvement and School Quality providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; 2018-19 CEP 50   encourage parents to utilize the Tuesday afternoon Family Engagement time to meet with teachers to discuss  student progress; send home monthly reminders for parents to have their email addresses updated and/or added to the school database in order to receive notices from the school regarding events or programs offered by the school; ● strengthening the home school connection through utilization of JUPITER, an online communication tool that allows teachers to communication directly with parents about their individual child’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) School-Parent Compact (SPC) PS/IS 66K , in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. School Responsibilities: Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● implementation of a Scholar’s Program in grades kindergarten through grade 6; and ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; 2018-19 CEP 51  ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● Cool Culture program for families of students in grades pre-kindergarten and kindergarten to visit cultural institutions throughout the five boroughs for free; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● utilization of JUPITER, Class DoJo enables parents to have access to their child’s academic progress, as well as to communicate with child’s teacher; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); 2018-19 CEP 52  ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● school-based website affords parents further access to school-wide events, academic programs and initiatives; ● parents access to email school staff through school website; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; Parent/Guardian Responsibilities: ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district;  check frequently for email notices sent from the school, Parent Coordinator, or from teachers regarding the progress of their student; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; 2018-19 CEP 53  ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● provide opportunities for grade eight students to earn service credit by performing school based community service; ● middle school student collaboration with lower grade students to support academic achievement; ● exhibit model/positive behaviors in all areas in the school to earn “Keys” as part of the school’s effort to reward excellent values and character; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. School Responsibilities: Standards and Assessments by: I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● implementation of a Scholar’s Program in grades kindergarten through grade 6; and ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships 2018-19 CEP 54  Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● Cool Culture program for families of students in grades pre-kindergarten and kindergarten to visit cultural institutions throughout the five boroughs for free; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● utilization of JUPITER and Class DoJo to enable parents to have access to their child’s academic progress, as well as to communicate with child’s teacher; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; 2018-19 CEP 55  Provide general support to parents by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● school-based website affords parents further access to school-wide events, academic programs and initiatives; ● parents access to email school staff through school website; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; Parent/Guardian Responsibilities: II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district 2018-19 CEP 56   check frequently for email notices sent from the school, Parent Coordinator, or from teachers regarding the progress of their student; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; III. Student Responsibilities ● provide opportunities for grade eight students to earn service credit by performing school based community service; ● middle school student collaboration with lower grade students to support academic achievement; ● exhibit model/positive behaviors in all areas in the school to earn “Keys” as part of the school’s effort to reward excellent values and character; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 2018-19 CEP 57  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 18 School Name P.S. /I.S. 66K Borough Brooklyn School Number 066 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Lucille Jackson Coach Erika Jones ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher S. Slome Teacher/Subject Area Jewel Redhead/Math Teacher/Subject Area Brooke Kerrigan/Social Studies Related-Service Provider Julie Yarimi, SETTS Superintendent Beverly Wilkins Assistant Principal Mohamed Khan Coach type here School Counselor Lisa Richardson Parent Mr. Smith Parent Coordinator Anthony Baker Field Support Center Staff Member M. Faustin /Translator/H/C Other (Name and Title) Antoinette Grant, Dean C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 1 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 2 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics 2018-19 CEP 58  Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 824 Total number of ELLs 31 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 3.76% Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 1 4 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 K 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 3 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 2 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 5 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 6 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 7 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 8 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 9 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? The assessment tools that are used by the staff include, but are not limited to the following: ECLAS, Fountas & Pinnell, Ready-Gen, DRA, TCRWP, Fundations, and teacher-created assessments. Treasures Leveled reading libraries and differentiated workbooks. Teachers conference throughout the year with individual students to determine the students to determine the student's current reading level. Running records are used to determine reading accuracy, reading comprehension, fluency, retelling skills, and writing proficiency. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? 2018-19 CEP 59  Classroom teachers and ELLs personnel will analyze the data on an ongoing basis. This data will drive instruction and will address the area(s) of academic concerns in literacy (phonics, fluency, phonemic awareness, decoding). Additionally, push-in/ pull-out support addressed students individual needs. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? Based on the information from teachers, student assessments, conferences with ENL teachers, classroom teachers, parents, and support staff, our ENL program benefits our students and increases student achievement. The assessment tools that are used by the staff include, but are not limited to the following: ECLAS, Fountas & Pinnel, Ready-Gen, DRA, TCRWP, Fundations, Treasures Leveled reading libraries and differentiated workbooks. Teachers confer throughout the year with individual students to determine the student's current reading level. Running records are used to determine reading accuracy, reading comprehension, fluency, retelling skills, and writing proficiency. The instructional objectives aim to provide targeted intervention through a tiered system of instructional support. Layers of instructional support are aligned to the standard core curriculum which are based on the needs of the learners. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? ENL providers, classroom teachers, parents, and support staff convene to devise an action plan to implement the following school year. Action plan may include but are not limited to push in versus pull out model, more targeted instructions or skills 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] Students are provided with increasingly intensive, targeted instruction designed to match their learning needs, as demonstrated by performance on periodically administered assessments. The RTI model is designed to determine whether students are benefiting from an instructional program within a reasonable times, build more effective instructional programs for students who are not benefiting, compare the efficacy of different forms of instruction, and design more effective, individualized instructional programs. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. Using NYSELAT, ECLAS, and Home Language Survey assessment tools, teachers are able to gain insight into the strengths and weaknesses of their students. Once a student's needs are identified, they are grouped accordingly. This also informs the delivery of instruction and allows for differentiation using flexible grouping. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? The Language Allocation Policy team hold conferences with classroom teachers and AIS providers during inquiry meetings; conduct parent workshops, and present findings to the School Based Support Team. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. The instructional program for English Language Learners is consistent with CR Part 154.2 guidelines for time allocation of two units to beginners and intermediate. Mini lessons, modeling and conferencing are used to explicitly teach a skill and/or strategy. Our program strives to raise the standards of all ELL students in a free- standing ENL program. As 2018-19 CEP 60  an implication for language acquisition, all units of ENL instruction for ELL's will be based on content area and during the pull-out sessions students will be supported through the use of strategies as outlined in the comprehensive approach to balanced literacy and comprehensive approach for mathematics. Focus will be reading, writing, listening, comprehension and speaking as the five standards for ENL instruction are followed. Literacy, Math, Social Studies and Science are taught through connections with language development. b. TBE program. If applicable. N/A c. DL program. If applicable. N/A 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? As per results of the 2016 NYSESLAT, Expanding: Eight students will receive 180 minutes of ENL instruction per week; Transitional: Seven students will receive 180 minutes of ENL instruction per week; Emerging: Five students will receive 360 minutes of ENL instruction per week; Entering: Two students will receive 360 minutes of ENL instruction per week; Commanding: Three students will receive two years of extended services in ESL. Services will be implemented in the Stand-alone model, Integrated model and/or Flexible model. Students who scored transitioning and expanding will receive push-in services as well. Two F-status teachers provide instructional support for students who receive ELL services. Communication between the ELL teachers and classroom teachers is ongoing to ensure academic rigor. Three students will receive instruction for two years after testing out. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. All classes are heterogeneously grouped with the exception of the Scholars Students, who are grouped together. Classes travel together as one group. Students who are deficient in writing are provided assistance through a push in or pull out model for small group instruction. Academic Intervention Service providers work on these skills in a small group setting. Computer assisted instruction as well as audio and visual aids are used to foster achievement in all subject areas. The proficiency level of entitled students are determined by using the NYSELAT Exam history report, RLAT. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? Language instruction is aligned to ENL and ELA Common Core Learning Standards. All classes are taught in English. Students' native languages are not used in instruction or assessments. All elements of balance literacy are incorporated into the instructional program, which includes manipulative, visual aids, books on tape, videos, computers, Smart Boards, laptops, overhead projectors, listening centers, charts, and field trips to enable our ELLs reach the standards. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status a. Classroom teachers are informed which of their ELL students have an IEP and what special needs they may have. Accommodations are made and instructions are differentiated. The ELL teachers will meet with the staff developer, classroom teachers and supervisors, as well as with related services staff, to plan and design instruction for ELLs. The plan for SIFE (Students with Interrupted Formal Education) is to re-evaluate their needs upon re-entry. b. Newly enrolled ELLs meet with the School Assessment Team to become acclimated to the school community. Classroom teachers assign a class buddy or mentor to provide a smooth transition. Newly enrolled ELLs who achieve proficiency on the NYSITELL may be given a transition letter or remain in the free-standing ENL program at the parent's request. Newly enrolled 2018-19 CEP 61  ELL's who are not proficient as indicated on the NYSITELL are given a Continued Entitlement letter. c. ELLs who are identified at risk or who have special needs are evaluated by the SAT with the parent's approval to determine what other services are needed. Service for ELLs who also receives Special Education services are provided in accordance with students' Individual Education Programs. To ensure equal access to all students, classroom teachers are notified of any programs that students may be eligible to apply for (eg Student Council, Service Squad etc). After school tutorials are offered to students in grades three through eight in Math and ELA. d. Students who are identified as long term ELLs will be provided with additional instructional time in literacy and get small group instruction and push-in services . Targeted interventions for math include hands-on activities to tell time, count money, add, subtract, and multiply. Social Studies interventions include the development of map skills, use of audio visual aids in content area instruction and the use of multicultural literature. Social Studies and Science content area instruction is supported by instructional materials aligned to the standards through the development of themes and content topics and hands on activities. e. We evaluate the success of the ELL programs based on student promotion out of the ELL program and/or advancement in level. According the NYSELAT exam history report, thirty to forty percent of the ELL population test out of the program each year. Ninety percent of the remaining students demonstrate significant progress in one year. Students in grades six through eight take Spanish as their language elective. In order to ensure continued success of former ELL students, professional development opportunities are offered to teachers, guidance counselors, school-based support personnel, and paraprofessionals throughout the year. ENL strategies to address the needs of our ELL population are embedded into all workshops. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? Instructional strategies for ELL-SWDs include the use of audio visual aids, maps, hands-on activities, multicultural literature. Comprehensive literary approaches include independent writing and word study as well as guided, shared, and independent reading. Resources used for Level 4 and 5 include "English, Yes." Levels A, C, and E use "Just Right Reading" and Levels A, B, and C, include "Best Practices in Reading" and Exploring Idioms in English." We do not have students that qualify as SIFE. the instructional plan for students who receive ELL services for 4 to 6 years includes all resources and strategies listed above as well as scaffold instruction and small group AIS instruction. Communication between the ELL teachers and the classroom teachers are ongoing to ensure academic rigor. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? As an implication for language acquisition, all units of ENL instruction for ELLs will focus primarily in the content area(s). During the pull-out sessions students will be supported through the use of strategies as outlined in the comprehensive approach to balanced literacy and comprehensive approach for mathematics. Focus will be on reading, writing, listening, comprehension and speaking as the five standards for ENL instruction are followed. Literacy, math, social studies and science are taught through connections with language development. The following materials and strategies are used for effective instruction: Materials and Strategies Treasures Reading Anthology(Guided Readers K-5) Treasures Supplemental ENL Activities (K-5) Ready- Gen Reading Program Progress Class Novels Glencoe Reading Anthology (Independent readers/class novels 6-8) Glencoe Supplemental ENL Activities (6-8) Envision (K-5) Fountas and Pinnel New York Science (K-8) Creating America (K-8) Dept. of Ed. Units of Study Social Studies Trade Books 2018-19 CEP 62  Small group instruction Graphic Organizers Hands on Activities Integration of Visual Arts Best Practices in Reading (K-5) Conferencing Peer Tutoring Use of multimedia materials Kinestetic Activities Integration of technology Use of manipulatives Integration of Music Independent/Group work Listening/Speaking activities Language instruction is aligned to ENL and SWD students 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. Language instruction is aligned to ELL and ELA Common Core Learning Standards. P.S./I.S. 66 acknowledges the importance of integrating both language and content. Content area instruction is supported by the acquisition of instructional materials aligned to the C.C.L.S and through the development of themes and content topics. Instructional strategies for ELLS include the use of audio visual aids, maps, hands-on activities, multicultural literature. Comprehensive literary approaches include independent writing, word study, guided, shared, and independent reading. Resources used for Levels 4 and 5 include "English, Yes." Levels A, C, and E use "Just right Reading" and Levels A, B and C include "Best Practices in Reading" and Exploring Idions in English". We use Reflex Math, after school programs/remediation, Math Manipulatives, and Foundations in Math. Social Studies interventions include the development of map skills , use of audio visual aids in content area instruction and the use of multicultural literature. Social Studies and Science content area instruction is supported by instructional materials aligned to the standards through the development of themes and content topics and hands on activities. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? Academic Intervention Services are embedded in the school's program for targeted student groups; ELLs are included for these services. There are various enrichment activities which are provided after schools and includes ELL students. Examples include ELA and Math Support (Saturday Academy), Word and Vocabulary Development, Italian Club, Culinary Arts, Chorus, Piano Instruction, Industrial Arts, Cheer leading, Yoga, Basketball, Steel Pan, Zumba/Hip Hop, Step, and the Champs Program. The aforementioned activities will continue for the 2017-2018 school year. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? N/A 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. ELLs are involved in all of our school programs, as described in out response to Question # 11 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. The following instructional materials are used to support ELLs: Smart Boards, laptops, computers, listening centers, overhead projectors, audio visual aids, maps, hands-on activities, integration of visual arts, conferencing, peer tutoring, hands on activities/games, multicultural literature, kinesthetic activities, use of manipulatives, integration of music, independent/group work, and listening/speaking activities. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? 2018-19 CEP 63  Language instruction is aligned to ENL and ELA common core learning standards. All classes are taught in English. Students' native languages are used as a scaffold (when necessary), but are not used in instruction or assessments. Use of ENL techniques and strategies. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. The ELL teachers will meet with staff developers, teachers, and supervisors, as well as with related service staff, to plan and design instruction for ELLs. These meetings take place during common prep times and Tuesday inquiry. ELL teachers are provided with curriculum materials, resources, and standards based task. Both the ELLs and classroom teachers will design a customized action plan to target areas of growth. Diagnosis of samples of student work to determine instruction. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? The following instructional materials are used to support ELLs: Smart Boards, laptops, computers, listening centers, overhead projectors, audio visual aids, maps, hands-on activities, intergration of visual arts, conferencing, peer tutoring, hands on activities/games, multicultural literature, kinestetic activities, use of manipulatives, integration of music, independent/group work, and listening/speaking activities. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). Newly enrolled ELLs meet with peers to help new students acclimate to PS/IS 66, members of the School Assessment Team to become acclimated to the school community. Service providers adhere to state, district, and school expectations while following core curriculum. Classroom teachers assign a mentor or class buddy to provide smooth transition.. New ELLs who enroll throughout the year are encouraged to participate in all school-wide activities, both during the day and after school. In addition, students participate in trips, plays, sports, and auditorium programs. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? Students in grades six through eight take Spanish as their language elective. In addition, Italian language is offered as an after-school enrichment program. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? N/A Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? At PS 66K, provides a wide range of professional development opportunities 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include 2018-19 CEP 64  how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. Professional Development opportunities are offered to teachers, guidance counselors, school based support personnel and paraprofessionals throughout the year. Topics include, but are not limited to English Language Arts, the Writing Process, Mathematics, Science, Social Studies, analyzing student work/data, the Arts, Socializations and Character, multiple intelligences and differentiated instruction, etc. ENL strategies to address the needs of our ELL population are embedded into all workshops. ENL teachers attend network, citywide and national conferences and trainings to keep abreast of current ENL trends as well as workshops provided by the Office of ELLs. Those workshops include ENL and data analyze, differentiated instruction for ELLs, tiered instruction, reading and writing strategies for ENL teachers, etc. The ENL teachers are ENL certified , and related services and mainstream teachers are certified in their areas. All school staff are provided with ongoing professional development opportunities (15% total hours) at grade conferences, faculty conferences, and workshops that enables them to increase ELL student achievement. Professional development opportunities include but are not limited to understanding the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS) and ENL placement, a review of the ENL program, modifications for ELLs strategies for teaching ELLs in the mainstream classes, appreciating the different cultures and languages in the schools and how to best support ELLs in rigorous academic tasks through scaffolding and bridging techniques. Attendance documentation is mainstreamed by administration. Teachers have the opportunity to attend professional development offered by the Office of English Language Learners through out the year, such as ENL for Science Teachers. In addition, district wide and city wide conferences as well as online resources such as articles in "Colorin Colorado". Inter-visitations and collaborative meetings between classroom teachers and ENL providers serve to observe best practices and provide a smooth transition from one school level to another. The 15% total hours of ELLs training is conducted through faculty conferences held during the day, professional development workshops and during collaborative team meetings. Records of these activities are maintained in an administrative binder in the principals office. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? PS 66K provides ongoing opportunities for parents to obtain knowledge and expectations of the ELLs program. During the meeting the ELLs provider, classroom teacher, educational assistant and parent coordinator are included in the meeting to discuss the expectations of the program. The ELLs provider(s) will share assessment results, summative and formative data as it relates to specific content areas. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. ELL parent involvement has increased during the 2016-2017 school year as . Parents participated in the following: Literacy workshops, ELL Parent workshops, Mathematics, Curriculum Night, Talent Shows, School dances, School Carnivals, Fund raising events,Cultural Day events. Additionally, ELL parents obtain pertinent information on curriculum and ways to enhance the learning experiences beyond the school community. Trips- ENL parents are involved in trips and extra-curricular activities. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Bilingual dictionaries were ordered in Arabic-English, Spanish- English, Haitian-Creole- English. These were distributed to staff, parent coordinator, nurse, secretary, principal, assistant principals, and parents. These tools supplemented communication between parents and staff. Students are given packets of materials to be used in mainstream classrooms. Diagrams, photographs, graphs and charts are used to clarify concepts. 2018-19 CEP 65  2018-19 CEP 66 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Lucille Jackson, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 CEP 67  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: P.S./I.S. 66 School DBN: 18K066 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Lucille Jackson Title Principal Mohamed Khan Assistant Principal Anthony Baker Parent Coordinator F. Jean ; S. Slome ENL/Bilingual Teacher Mr. Smith Parent Jewel Redhead, 8 th grade Teacher/Subject Area Brooke Kerrigan, 8 th grade Teacher/Subject Area Erika Jones, Literacy Coach Coach Lisa Richardson School Counselor Beverly Wilkins Soeurette Fougere Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Antoinette Grant Other Dean Christine Puleo Other AIS Provider M. Mackey/ SETTS Other Teacher Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 09/02/17 09/02/17 09/02/17 09/02/17 09/02/17 09/02/17 09/02/17 09/02/17 09/02/17 09/02/17 09/02/17 09/02/17 09/02/17 09/02/17 2018-19 CEP 68  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 18K066 School Name: PS 66 Superintendent: Beverly Wilkins The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this Mohamed Erika Patrick Susan Khan Jones Petot Slome conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Assistant Principal Literacy Coach Assistant Principal ENL Teacher No Yes No No Yes Yes Yes Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. Parents will complete Part III Home Language Survey (HLIS) and check preferred language for both oral and written communication. This survey is kept on file. Proceeding the completion of the survey, staff members or translation and interpretation unit (if needed) are available to communicate (orally and written) with parents in their preferred language. ATS report (RHLA report):This reports discloses a comprehensive breakdown of the native language specifically by grade for all students. 2018-19 CEP 69  Student Emergency Contact cards: Biographical information including preferred language both oral and written are included on this document. Parent surveys are issued throughout the school year. Theses surveys are provided to families in their preferred language as well as staff members are available to support if needed. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral English Arabic Haitian Creole Spanish English English English Spanish 100% 100% 100% 100% English Arabic Haitian Creole Spanish 100% 50% 100% 100% 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. Not Applicable Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to Families Curriculum Night Letters September 13, 2017 After-School September 13, 2017 Parent Association Letter September 13, 2017 How do you plan to translate? Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. At PS 66K, staff members or the Translation and Interpretation unit will facilitate in translating written communications for parents' in their preferred language. At PS 66K, staff members or the Translation and Interpretation unit will facilitate in translating written communications for parents' in their preferred language. At PS 66K, staff members or the Translation and Interpretation unit will facilitate in translating written 2018-19 CEP 70  Welcome Back Letters September 13, 2017 communications for parents' in their preferred language. At PS 66K, staff members or the Translation and Interpretation unit will facilitate in translating written communications for parents' in their preferred language. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide Mandated ELL Parent Orientation September 12, 2017 Individual ELL parent meeting September 19, 2017 Parent Teacher Conference November 9, 2017 Curriculum Night September 13, 2017 interpretation service(s)? Translation Interpretation Unit or Staff members are utilized to support families by translating (orally) in their preferred language. Translation Interpretation Unit or Staff members are utilized to support families by translating (orally) in their preferred language. Additionally, other resources are available such as dictionaries and other related translation materials written in the parents' preferred language. Translation Interpretation Unit or Staff members are utilized to support families by translating (orally) in their preferred language. Translation Interpretation Unit or Staff members are utilized to support families by translating (orally) in their preferred language. Additionally, other resources are available such as dictionaries and other related translation materials written in the parents' preferred language. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. In the event of a school emergency, staff members will provide assistance and support (both orally and written) to reach limited-English -proficient families. Staff members will place phone calls and provide written documentation (letter) in the families preferred language. 2018-19 CEP 71  Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Professional Development conducted by Language Access Coordinator ATS report that tells about languages. Parents preferred communication shared with staff members Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) At PS/IS 66K we support limited-English Proficient parents by ensuring pertinent information and resources are available through flyers, letters, emails, and brochures (translated to Spanish, Haitian Creole, and Arabic). These correspondences are issued during the Mandated ELL parent orientation, PTA meetings, Parent workshops, Family Engagement time, and other school related events. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? At PS/IS 66K, we utilize various tools to gather feedback from limited-English-proficient parents. For example: Parent surveys, workshops, curriculum meetings, family engagement sessions and other school related events. Based on surveys, the Language Translation Coordinator and other related service providers will revise current practices and parent outreach to improve language services. Additionally, dictionaries and related translation equipment/materials will be used to support limited-English- proficient parents. 2018-19 CEP 72 
