2018-19 COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (CEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 75K077 School Name: P.S. K077 Principal: EBONY RUSSELL 2018-19 CEP 1  Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 CEP 2  Section 1: School Information Page School Information School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: P077K 307500013077 K-HS 62 Park PaceBrooklyn, NY 11217 718-789-1191 Phone Number: School Number (DBN): 75K077 718-857-2667 Fax: Ebony Russell Erussel3@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Geographical District: 75 Superintendent’s Office Address: Email Address: Ebony Russell Jennifer Quinn Ms. Bernadette Mack Elizabeth McShea NA N/A N/A District Information KetlerLouissaint Superintendent: 400 1 st Avenue, New York 10010 klouiss@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 212-802-1501 Phone Number: 212-802-1678 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) Brooklyn South Marie Callaghan FSC: Executive Director: 2018-19 CEP 3  Executive Director’s Office Address: 400 1st Avenue, New York 10010 MCallaghan4@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 212-802-1503 Phone Number: 718-941-3152 Fax: 2018-19 CEP 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Ebony Russell Jennifer Quinn Bernadette Mack Lenora Johnson NA Elizabeth Mcshea Yehudit Hess *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/UFT Member/UFT Member/UFT 2018-19 CEP 5  Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Joan Moore Guadalupe Campos Adrian Duffy Diana Massonete Member/PTA Member/ Member/PTA Member/PTA Member/ PTA Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ 2018-19 CEP 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with 2018-19 CEP 7  the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement 2018-19 CEP 8  Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Our mission at P77K, is deeply rooted in identifying how students learn best, and by providing each of our students with a firm foundation of learning within a supportive, nurturing, and caring environment that is respectful for all. We present our students with a full, rigorous curriculum that gives access to general education programs. With that, our goal is to foster life-long learners who will reach their highest potential in school, at home, in their communities, and into adulthood. 2018-19 CEP 9  2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. P77K is a multi-sited organization totaling 39 self-contained classes and six inclusion classes. The classes are comprised of 19 grades K-5 classes, 13 grades 6-8 classes and 13 grades 9-12 classes. The six inclusion classes range from elementary school through high school. These classes are serving primarily students who have been diagnosed with Autism. The school population is 46% Black, 21% Hispanic, 17% White, 12% Asian, 0.7% American Indian or Alaskan Native. The 2018-2019, 77K Comprehensive Education Goals were developed collaboratively with the School Leadership Team and the Administrative Cabinet. Each goal was developed as a result of an in-depth analysis of the 2017-2018 end of year data as well as a needs assessment that was conducted in the beginning of the 2017-2018 school year. Each goal is aligned to the school's budget, vision, and mission statement as well as the Capacity Framework and the Citywide Instructional Expectations. These goals also reflect our drive to promote equity and excellence for all through collaboration, communication and cooperation. The vision of our school lies in the belief system that each student learns differently. Therefore, each student is given access to the standards at their current level and at different entry points. We are charged with offering each student the opportunity to develop strong self-esteem, become responsible citizens, be career-ready, and achieve academic excellence. This will support our mission, which is to foster life-long learners who will reach their highest potential in school, at home, in the community and into adulthood. An area of strength within our organization is that our teacher teams systematically analyze key elements of their work; such as, but not limited to: classroom practice, assessment data, and student work for the students they share or on whom they are focused. It is noted that during common planning time, if we collaborate when designing and modifying effective curricula, as well as, work together to pool our resources when creating adapted lessons, then students’ individual learning needs would be addressed, and they will be able to demonstrate the acquisition of their targeted goals. This is in direct alignment to collaborative teaching in the Framework for Great Schools. We will continue to partner with the Learning Partner Program (LPP), SMiLE (Structured Methods in Language Education) Study Pilot, FUNdations, CookShop, Get Ready to Learn (GRtL), Best Buddies, Mighty Milers, utilize REMIND, and conduct inter-visitations. Additionally, for the 2018-2019 school year we anticipate the continued use of Social Express and Kneo-Worlds programs for students. Finally, due to the strength of our practices, we have been recommended to be a teaching academy for new NYC DOE hirees. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. Almost 100% of the students at P77K are on the Autism Spectrum; some are verbal, most are minimally verbal, and some non-verbal. As a result of the diversity of our students, many of them require the usage of assistive augmentative communication devices and picture exchange communication systems. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. 2018-19 CEP 10  For the 2018-2019 school year, P77K as an organization, will continue working with the Learning Partners (LPP) initiative which will support our continued efforts to prioritize aligning our instruction to the instructional shifts and the Framework for Great Schools. During the 2017-2018 school year we made great gains in differentiation and assessment techniques with over 87% of our teachers being rated highly effective or Effective in this domain. These gains are a direct result of the targeted professional development that was implemented during the 2017-2018 school year; as well as our collaborative work with the Learning Partners Program. We have also seen significant gains in teacher-teacher collaboration and inter-visitations, throughout the organization. Finally, we have seen an increase increase in parent communication with all students, especially with our ELL parents. One of our continued key area of focus for the 2018-2019 school year is for our students across all populations to continuously engage in rigorous differentiated instruction and identify student progress through the use of formative assessments. In order to continue to strengthen this area we will continue to monitor and revise our differentiated curricula, with assessment rubrics that meet student’s varied instructional needs for the 2018-2019 school year. We will emphasize student self-assessment, both academically and behaviorally. The intended outcome of each comprehensive educational goal is to build the capacity of each stakeholder and promote successful student achievement, by providing our students with the access to a school environment that focuses on rigorous instruction and positive social emotional development. We continue to utilize the District 75 Alternate Assessment Frameworks, ELA Attainment, First Author, FUNdations, SMiLE, and the Passport to Social Studies curriculum, which are all aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS) and the Career Development and Occupational Studies (CDOS) Standards in order to promote rigorous instruction through Literacy, Social Studies and Science. We use the NYC STEM Framework to serve in enhancing our Science instruction. Also utilized is Math Attainment, which not only provides tools for skills-based instruction that aligns to the math instructional shifts but gives the students access to real world experiences. Finally, the Work, Achievement, Values and Education (WAVE) curriculum is in place for students aged 18-21, who participate in community based learning, to promote post-secondary success by focusing on vocational and job readiness skills in school and at community based learning sites in relation to each student’s Level 1 Vocational Assessments. All curricula utilized at P77K are aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS), the Career Development and Occupational Studies (CDOS) Standards and to the ELA and Math instructional shifts. The Curriculum Committee meet regularly to both analyze the data provided by teachers regarding student progress and to refine previously developed curriculum maps in the areas of Literacy, Social Studies, and Science. The curriculum maps provide continuous support to faculty in the development of lesson planning that promote higher order thinking skills and that support each student’s Individualized Education Program (IEP) goals. In addition, staff continue to work collaboratively in Professional Learning Committees (PLCs) to further differentiate the WAVE and the D75 Alternate Assessment Frameworks curriculum to meet the diverse learning needs of our student body. In order to promote higher thinking skills and refine academic tasks for our students, the Administrative Cabinet, District Coaches and Mentors work with our teacher teams and the Instructional Cabinet to ensure that we effectively guide teachers, serving on the Curriculum Committee, in developing a complementary set of curriculum map revisions that are indicative of rigorous functional, academic and vocational tasks, student work and data outcomes. The impact of the instructional cabinet and distributive leadership model, is that teachers are now using a curriculum aligned to the instructional shifts. These are also reflective of instructional adjustments, modifications and extensions designed to prompt higher order thinking skills and meet the learning gaps and needs of our diverse student body. During the 2018-2019 school year P77K staff will continue utilize the Rigor Meter, Webb's Depth of 2018-19 CEP 11  Knowledge (DOK), and the P77K Prompt Hierarchy . Through this work and the utilization of data, we have seen growth in both teacher planning and in questioning and discussion. We as an organization believe that our students learn best through the use of visual supports, hands-on manipulatives, repetition, scaffolding, and small group instruction. The impact of this work ensures that our teacher teams are effectively supported in utilizing curriculum maps that highlight revisions to the curricula and reflect the use of student data including the Student Annual Needs Determination Inventory (SANDI), the instructional shifts, IEP progress monitoring, and module assessments. Curriculum maps are evident of teacher knowledge of the content, required skills, differentiation, and their students so that student data and success is at the forefront when planning tasks, questions, scaffolds, and/or supports that need to be embedded in the lesson planning with specificity regarding a variety of learners. Student data from formative and incremental assessments are used to plan strategic groups within and across classes that show similar skill abilities or gaps. Other groups are heterogeneous to bring diversity and promote peer learning, especially with nonverbal students. Thoughtful grouping promotes peer-to-peer interaction and access to learning and rigor of instruction. 2018-19 CEP 12  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 75K077 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 0K,01,02,03,04,05,06,07,08,09,10,11,12 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 284 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient N/A N/A % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance N/A N/A # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 84.0% % Attendance Rate 83.8% % Reduced Lunch 26.4% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.4% 22.5% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 20.4% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 1% 13% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A N/A N/A 89.3% 0.0% 99.6% 40.8% 15.8% 0.4% 6 3% 8.8 N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 CEP 13  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. A broad range of stakeholders across the organization reviewed school-wide data and met in order to determine areas of strength and areas of need for the students of P77K. Stakeholders include but are not limited to the Principal, Assistant Principals, Teachers, Paraprofessionals, School Psychologist, School Leadership team, Parent Coordinator, and the United Federation of Teachers Union Representative. Additionally, a needs assessment was given to the P77K Instructional Cabinet, which is comprised of a representative from each part of the school organization. Furthermore, each Professional Learning Committee was asked to review and contribute valuable information. Each stakeholder was asked to review the school’s 2017-2018 Comprehensive Education Plan (CEP) goals, data from the Student Annual Needs Determination Inventory (SANDI), as well as current curriculum and previous quality review reports from the 2015-2016 and the current quality review from the 2017-2018 school year, in which we received nine out fo ten Well-Developed ratings. In addition, the aforementioned individuals were asked to review the schools vision and mission statements as well as the instructional focus for the 2017-2018 school year. Each stakeholder was asked to highlight best practices throughout the organization while answering the targeted questions that are addressed within each indicator and what impact it has on student achievement. After careful analysis of the Spring 2017 and Fall 2017 Student Annual Needs Determination Inventory (SANDI) results, it was evident that there were clear gains and areas that needed to be improved within ELA and Math components of the assessment. Our school's SANDI results have increased, showing that students performing at level three in reading for information standards increased from 31% to 37% and in math, for operation and algebra standards increased from 27% to 35%. Therefore, as a result, it was decided that we needed to focus for the 2018-2019 school year on an increase of rigorous instruction in the areas of ELA and Math, ensuring rigorous instruction for all learners in order to continue to increase progress. As evidenced by the results of the 2017-2018 SANDI/FAST, in the targeted areas, specifically the areas of English Language Arts and Math, in ELA, 49% percent of students were on level one, 64% of students were on level two, and 72% of students were on level three. Whereas in math, specifically in operations in algebra, 65% of students were on level one, 28% were on level two and 20% of students were on level three. As a result, the goals listed below were developed collaboratively after reviewing multiple sources of data. 2018-19 CEP 14  Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 100% of students participating in alternate assessment will demonstrate an increase of 15% in Math and Reading and a 10% increase in writing; as measured by end of year SANDI/FAST scores. 2018-19 CEP 15  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional  programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). We are utilizing ELA Attainment and the D75 Alternate Assessment Frameworks for our student body in order to promote increased proficiency reading. In our elementary unit, we are supporting the curriculum with FUNndations and SMiLE. In addition, teachers meet in teams to use student data to plan/revise lessons and to embed real-world application performance tasks into the curriculum, appropriate to the needs and ages of the students. Instructional Coaches support teachers and students with the aforementioned implementation. Data will be collected utilizing school-wide benchmark assessments and SANDI/FAST. Fidelity to the curriculum will also be observed during Administration's cycles of observation. High School students we will utilize First Author to support the accomplishment of this goal, while continuing to differentiate ELA Attainment and the D75 Alternate Assessment Frameworks. Data will be collected utilizing school-wide benchmark assessments and SANDI/FAST. Student progress will be discussed and reviewed in the teachers' professional learning communities. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Alternately Assessed Students K-8 September 2018-June 2019 Principal, Assistant Principals, Instructional Coaches, Classroom Teachers and Cluster Teachers Alternately Assessed students 9-12 September 2018-June 2019 2018-19 CEP 16 Students, staff and families will participate in the School Literacy Fair, showcasing student achievement in ELA. All Students September 2018-June 2019 Instructional Coaches, Model Teachers, Classroom Teachers, Classroom Paraprofessionals, Unit Coordinators, Parent Coordinator, and Assistant Principals. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. In order to continuously engage families and support their understanding of Rigorous instruction and the Common Core, P77K will do the following for the 2018-2019 school year.  Office of People with Developmental Disabilities (OPWDD) Eligibility Front Door Trainings  Medicaid Service Coordination (multilingual, English, Chinese Spanish) - Individual referrals for state eligible services – respite, after school programs, community habitation, intensive behavior supports, and crisis intervention in home IEP (parent concerns and training requests) Family Cook-Shop/healthy eating program provided by NYC Food Bank   Guardianship  Transition planning  Bussing issues  Housing assistance referrals (Eviction Prevention, HRA, CAMBA)   Quarterly informational newsletters  Outreach to sheltered parents (McKinney Act)  New parent orientation (across all sites)  Alternate transportation (Access-A-Ride, Half fare Metro Cards)  Participate in D75 sponsored weekend events (movies, Brooklyn Family Day)  Work closely with parents regarding the PTA elections and Parent Advisory Council  Monthly parent meetings/forums Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Attainment ELA and Math curriculum – (Core Curriculum funding) Professional development provided by Attainment Math 2018-19 CEP 17  Scheduled teacher team cohorts that address planning in math Per session and instructional materials for STEM Fair Resources and donations that include Materials for the Arts and parent/community donations Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind X Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, 100% of students participating in alternate assessment will demonstrate an increase of 5% in Math and Reading and a 5% increase in Writing as measured by end of year SANDI/FAST scores. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) Student Annual Needs Determination Inventory-SANDI Formative Assessment Standards Tasks -FAST School Benchmarking Data Tool Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 18  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? According to the School Quality Snapshot, 96% of teachers indicate that students are safe in the hallways, bathrooms, and cafeteria. 88% of teachers indicate that adults at the school teach students how to advocate for themselves and 96% of parents believe that P77K offers activities and services to improve life outcomes for their child. Therefore, after a needs assessment was conducted and a review of our internal incident reporting form, data shows that during the second semester (Spring 2017 and Fall 2017) there has been not been an increase in students ability to appropriately express themselves. An analysis of the data shows that the antecedents of the behaviors are students becoming frustrated in expressing themselves and/or communicating their needs. Additionally, learning walks show there is an inconsistent use of language related to the behavioral expectations in the different locations of the school. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 100% of students who have documented student-to-student incidents, will demonstrate school-wide behavioral expectations; as evidenced by a 15% decrease in documented student-to-student incidents; as measured by the internal incident reporting form. 2018-19 CEP 19  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? The PBIS team, which will meet on a monthly basis to assist and support PBIS implementation, inclusive of data analysis and ongoing communication to staff. In addition P77K has implemented "Student Seminar" which will address PBIS and social-emotional learning of students. We will continue to have monthly "Student Advisory" meetings in order to increase collaboration across all of P77K's sites. Needs assessment and parent survey data also indicated that students would benefit from additional support or group discussions. Park Place Alternately Assessed students 6-12 September 2018-June 2019 School Psychologist, Teachers, Related Service Providers Through student advisory, we have have established open lines of communication for students to advocate their needs and peer concerns on a monthly basis to school administration and faculty. We will continue to establish and consistently reward student for demonstrating school-wide behavior expectations, through school-wide stores, booster events, Friday drawings for students "caught being good” . All Alternately Assessed September 2018- June 2019 PBIS team; teachers students K-12 School staff provide students with opportunities to engage in school-based extracurricular activities that include the Girls' Group, Student Advisory, Basketball Club, and Arts Club. Targeted student sub-groups October 2018 – June 2019 At the beginning of the school year, the school will distribute a behavior handbook to parents. During the Fall, parents will be invited to participate in a Passport Day to learn about the aspects of positive behavior support program and to see its application in different locations of the school. Parents Fall 2018 Teachers; related service providers; School leaders to facilitate scheduling School leaders; PBIS team 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. In order to continuously engage families and support their understanding of Rigorous instruction and the Common Core, P77K will do the following for the 2018-2019 school year.  Office of People with Developmental Disabilities (OPWDD) Eligibility Front Door Trainings 2018-19 CEP 20   Medicaid Service Coordination (multilingual, English, Chinese Spanish) - Individual referrals for state eligible services – respite, after school programs, community habitation, intensive behavior supports, and crisis intervention in home IEP (parent concerns and training requests) Family CookShop/healthy eating program provided by NYC Food Bank   Guardianship  Transition planning  Busing issues  Housing assistance referrals (Eviction Prevention, HRA, CAMBA)   Quarterly informational newsletters  Outreach to sheltered parents (McKinney Act)  New parent orientation (across all sites)  Alternate transportation (Access-A-Ride, Half fare Metro Cards)  Participate in D75 sponsored weekend events (movies, Brooklyn Family Day)  Work closely with parents regarding the PTA elections and Parent Advisory Council Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Poster making resources; book-making materials Communication devices that include PBIS symbols Instructional resources and incentives for students Scheduling to accommodate PBIS team meetings Staff to operate extra-curricular groups; flexible scheduling Staff to develop handbook Parent Coordinator and school leaders to conduct outreach Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, 100% students will demonstrate school-wide behavioral expectations, as evidenced by a 7% decrease in documented student-to-student incidents; as measured by the Internal Incident Reporting form. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. 2018-19 CEP 21  School Incident Reports Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 22  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 1. Relative to this Framework element, overall, we demonstrate strength. In the the 2017-2018 Quality Review, we earned 9 out of 10 Well-Developed in the indicators. These indicators include Positive Learning Environment, Teacher Support and Supervision, as well as Teacher Teams and Leadership Development. Additionally, according to the 2016-2017 NYC School Quality Guide, 92% of teachers strongly agree that at their school, teachers talk with one another about instruction. 2. The area that will be addressed, to further Student Achievement, is that of Collaborative Teachers. The 2017-2018 Quality Review did target one area, Pedagogy, as proficient. To further build our teachers' pedagogical skills to move from proficient to Well-Developed, we have identified, as a problem of practice, teachers' use of data. This ongoing assessment and data will drive teachers' instruction. Additionally, while 92% of teachers agreed or strongly agree that at their school, teachers talk with one another about instruction, we would like to see 100% of teachers talking and working with one another to support student growth. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 100% of P77K teachers will participate in at least four collaborative inter-visitations, in order to build their capacity in instructional strategies that promote student achievement; as evidenced by a 15% increase in using ongoing documented assessment in instruction within Domain 3D of the Danielson Framework. 2018-19 CEP 23  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Teachers meet bi-weekly in inquiry based cohorts, where they exchange ideas, analyze student work, examine data and review the common core learning standards and the career development occupational standards, in order to plan, act, implement, reflect, adjust, and share best pedagogical practices. Teacher meetings are regularly attended by school administration. Information gathered during teacher team meetings are utilized to structure and identify further professional development opportunities. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All Alternately Assessed teachers October 2018- June 2019 Assistant Principals, Instructional Coaches, Teachers, and Related Service Providers K-12 Teachers will be provided opportunities to attend professional development workshops during the instructional day. Teachers then submit feedback regarding their professional learning and share information with their team members and school community. All Alternatively Assessed teachers October 2018 – June 2019 Assistant Principals, Instructional Coaches, Teachers and Related Service Providers. K-12 All Alternately Assessed Teachers K-12 Parents October 2018-June 2019 Learning Partner Team, Assistant Principals, Principal, Teachers October 2018- Parent Coordinator, School leaders June 2019 Teachers will collaborate with Learning Partner Model teachers and team, in order to highlight and discuss best practices that can be utilized within the classroom. Teachers will utilize the Best Practices protocol to analyze and effectively implement identified successful practices. Transition coordinator in collaboration with the parent coordinator will send home a quarterly newsletter and host parent tours, which will showcase P77K best practices; as identified during teacher cohort meetings. Interpretation services will be provided during meetings and special events, in order to ensure that all parents have equitable access to our school learning community. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement 2018-19 CEP 24  How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. In order to continuously engage families and support their understanding of Rigorous instruction and the Common Core, P77K will do the following for the 2018-2019 school year.  Office of People with Developmental Disabilities (OPWDD) Eligibility Front Door Trainings  Medicaid Service Coordination (multilingual, English, Chinese Spanish) - Individual referrals for state eligible services – respite, after school programs, community habitation, intensive behavior supports, and crisis intervention in home IEP (parent concerns and training requests) Family CookShop/healthy eating program provided by NYC Food Bank   Guardianship  Transition planning  Busing issues  Housing assistance referrals (Eviction Prevention, HRA, CAMBA)   Quarterly informational newsletters  Outreach to sheltered parents (McKinney Act)  New parent orientation (across all sites)  Alternate transportation (Access-A-Ride, Half fare Metro Cards)  Participate in D75 sponsored weekend events (movies, Brooklyn Family Day)  Work closely with parents regarding the PTA elections and Parent Advisory Council Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Research-based writing curriculum (that may include software for targeted classes) Scheduling to accommodate teacher teams that analyze student work Support for parent outreach for activities Support for adapting writing activities for communication devices, ELL learners, and job embedded sessions Materials for publications of student work School Benchmarking Data Tool Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 2018-19 CEP 25  By February 2019, 100% of P77K teachers will participate in at least two collaborative inter-visitations, in order to build their capacity in instructional strategies that promote student achievement; as evidenced by a 10% increase in using ongoing documented assessment in instruction within Domain 3D of the Danielson Framework. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. ADVANCE Collaborative Inter-Visitations School Benchmarking Data Tool Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 26  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 1. The 2017-2018, analysis of ADVANCE shows that 0 % of teachers were rated Ineffective, 5. 82% were rated Developing, 76.52% were rated Effective and 17.66% were rated Highly Effective. According to the 2017-2018 school quality guide, 100% of teachers say that the principal communicates a clear vision for this school. 100% of teachers say that the principal makes clear to the staff his or her expectations for meeting instructional goals. 96% of families feel that the principal works to create a sense of community in the school. 97% of teachers say that the principal encourages feedback through regular meetings with parent and teacher leaders. Accordingly, the feedback from the 2017-2018 Quality Review stated as an Area of Celebration, "School leaders consistently communicate high expectations to the entire staff and provide training tied to expectations about how students learn. Teachers and staff establish a culture for learning that systematically communicates a unified set of high expectations for all students." 2. A review of Advance data shows that, school-wide, teachers are less proficient in component 3D of the Danielson Framework for Effective Teaching. Walk-throughs indicate that there is a need for improvement in both assessing students and in building students' self-assessment skills. Many students are either unaware or do not understand the tools being used to evaluate their progress both academically and social-emotionally. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, school leaders will develop purposeful professional learning communities and implement targeted professional development in formative and summative assessment techniques; as evidenced by a 25% performance increase in Danielson Component 3D. 2018-19 CEP 27  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? School leaders will conduct four professional developments with a focus on - the Danielson Framework for Effective Teaching rubric (3D): Teachers - effective assessment techniques - total participation techniques - assessment that checks for understanding Principal, Assistant Principals, Instructional Coaches, Learning Partners Model Teachers October 2018 November 2018 January 2019 March 2019 - Webb’s Depth of Knowledge. School leaders will establish a calendar of cycle of observations and will review the observations at scheduled cabinet meetings to determine need and progress of teachers in components 3D of the Danielson Framework for Effective Teaching. Teachers Sept 2018-June 2019 Principal, Assistant Principals School leaders will facilitate inter-visitations between teachers both within the school and with other schools serving students with autism for teachers to observe effective assessment techniques. Teachers October 2018 – May 2019 School leaders will provide workshops to support their understanding of federal, state and city standards. In addition, school leaders will provide workshops on curriculum and effective assessment techniques. New teachers and non-tenured teachers Sept 2018 – June 2019 Principal, Assistant Principals, Instructional Coaches, Learning Partners Model Teachers Principal, Assistant Principals, Instructional Coaches, Learning Partners Model Teachers, Parent Coordinator 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. 2018-19 CEP 28  In order to continuously engage families and support their understanding of Rigorous instruction and the Common Core, P77K will do the following for the 2018-2019 school year.  Office of People with Developmental Disabilities (OPWDD) Eligibility Front Door Trainings  Medicaid Service Coordination (multilingual, English, Chinese Spanish) - Individual referrals for state eligible services – respite, after school programs, community habitation, intensive behavior supports, and crisis intervention in home IEP (parent concerns and training requests) Family CookShop/healthy eating program provided by NYC Food Bank   Guardianship  Transition planning  Bussing issues  Housing assistance referrals (Eviction Prevention, HRA, CAMBA)   Quarterly informational newsletters  Outreach to sheltered parents (McKinney Act)  New parent orientation (across all sites)  Alternate transportation (Access-A-Ride, Half fare Metro Cards)  Participate in D75 sponsored weekend events (movies, Brooklyn Family Day)  Work closely with parents regarding the PTA elections and Parent Advisory Council Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Schedule adjustments to ensure that teachers and related service providers are at meetings Review and analyze Teach-boost data Review and analyze class inter-visitation feedback and data School Benchmarking Data Tool Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, school leaders will develop purposeful professional learning communities and implement targeted professional development in formative and summative assessment techniques; as evidenced by a 10% performance increase in Danielson Component 3D. 2018-19 CEP 29  School leaders will review teacher ADVANCE data mid year and in early spring. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Advance Teach-boost Observation Calendar Inter-visitation Data (Learning Partners) School Benchmarking Data Tool Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 30  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Upon review of the School Quality Snapshot, 95% of parent say that school staff regularly communicate with them about how the staff can help their children learn. about how the staff can help their children learn 92% of parents feel that teachers try to understand families' problems and concerns and 94% of teachers say that the school works closely with families to meet students' needs. In addition to analyzing the School Quality Snapshot, the Quality Review, the parent coordinators data, and SLT feedback, it was identified that there is a need to incorporate increased levels of technology when attempting to communicate more effectively with parents and increase parental engagement. It is believed that by utilizing an additional means of technology; we will provide additional opportunities for parents/guardians to join committees and attend workshops and/or meetings to be actively involved in their children's learning. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, there will be a 20% increase in parent communication with the school-wide community; as measured by the utilization of the REMIND communication system. 2018-19 CEP 31  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? School leaders, school leadership team and Parent Coordinator collaborate to conduct a needs assessment of parents, including translated versions for parents, and to establish a calendar of parent events for the 2018-2019 school year. Parents of all students To ensure that parents have the knowledge of the programs and curricula being used at the school, school staff will host a Curriculum night in Fall 2018 that includes workshops for parents, in which parents are invited to attend classes in the school. Parents of all students Teachers in collaboration with school leaders and staff will develop a form that lists two –five questions that parents can ask their children about school. The form will be sent on a consistent basis to parents via the communication notebook. Parents Parent Coordinator in collaboration with school leaders will disseminate a quarterly newsletter to parents that outlines the curriculum activities for that month, news from the teachers and Related Service Providers, and strategies for working with students at home. Parents 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Principal, Assistant Principals, Parent Coordinator Principal, Assistant Principals, Parent Coordinator Teachers, Parent Coordinator, Transition Coordinator Teachers, Related Service Providers August 2018, and ongoing as students enter the school Fall 2018 – Parent Forum Fall 2018 and Spring 2019 September 2018- June 2019 Sept 2018– June 2019, on a quarterly basis If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. In order to continuously engage families and support their understanding of Rigorous instruction and the Common Core, P77K will do the following for the 2018-2019 school year.  Office of People with Developmental Disabilities (OPWDD) Eligibility Front Door Trainings  Medicaid Service Coordination (multilingual, English, Chinese Spanish) - Individual referrals for state eligible services – respite, after school programs, community habitation, intensive behavior supports, and crisis intervention in home IEP (parent concerns and training requests)   Guardianship 2018-19 CEP 32  Family CookShop/healthy eating program provided by NYC Food Bank  Transition planning  Busing issues  Housing assistance referrals (Eviction Prevention, HRA, CAMBA)   Quarterly informational newsletters  Outreach to sheltered parents (McKinney Act)  New parent orientation (across all sites)  Alternate transportation (Access-A-Ride, Half fare Metro Cards)  Participate in D75 sponsored weekend events (movies, Brooklyn Family Day)  Work closely with parents regarding the PTA elections and Parent Advisory Council Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Schedule adjustments to ensure that teachers and related service providers are at meetings Schedule adjustments for parent activities Resources for adapting communication devices to incorporate goal planning Community resources to support Transition Fair Instructional materials and incentives to support parent involvement Translation services (Parent Coordinator) School Benchmarking Data Tool Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A SIG X PTA Funded In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, there will be a 10% increase in parent communication with the school-wide community; as measured by the utilization of the REMIND communication system. There would be monthly cycles of progress monitoring conducted to review parent involvement. By the end of December 2018, February and May 2019 – a pre- and post-analysis of parent involvement will be conducted to ascertain whether or not we are meeting our goals in increasing parent partnership and parent communication. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. REMIND Data PTA Meetings 2018-19 CEP 33  Parent Coordinator log book School Messenger Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 34  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Mathematics Science Social Studies At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Deficiency in reading comprehension and communication Inability to identify numbers, comprehend money and value, addition and subtraction facts Comprehension of cause and effect and the understanding of how the world works Inability to comprehend day to day eventsand how one's place influences a community, a culture and what it means to begood citizens beginning in the classroom Students who are unable to succeed due tobehaviors that impede their success and they lack coping skills Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Small group and one toone sessions During school day Small groups and one to one sessions During the school day Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Interactive reading, use of Smart Board interactive activities and story-telling Math games, inquiry-based activities and simulation of purchasingsituations that mirrors real world applications Hands-on inquiry-based learning and investigative activities Small groups Guided activities, Smart Board activities, reading trade booksand interactive texts Small groups During the school day and on trips During the school day and on trips One to one sessions During the school day Buddy system, teach coping skills and embed incentives specific to the student including the creation and implementation of social stories 2018-19 CEP 35  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) We are not a Title I school. However, we do have students in temporary housing. 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. N/A Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). Seven. 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 CEP 36  For students in temporary housing, we will provide, family support services, family worker visits, emergency supplies, such as donated clothing, school supplies, metro cards for school visits and guidance on agency support. 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. Three Hundred Dollars 2018-19 CEP 37  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools X Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. N/A 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). N/A Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A 2018-19 CEP 38  Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). N/A 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. N/A 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Column B Verify with an (X) Section Reference(s) Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 0 0 0 0 0 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. 2018-19 CEP 39  Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 CEP 40  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. 77K, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students 77K will support parents and families of Title I students by: ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; 2018-19 CEP 41  ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; Parental Involvement and School Quality In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the ESSA; 2018-19 CEP 42  ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) P77K in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Ensure that all students meet State Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; 2018-19 CEP 43  ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA). I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; 2018-19 CEP 44  Provide general support to parents by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; 2018-19 CEP 45  ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 2018-19 CEP 46  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 2018-19 CEP 47  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: At P77K, there are a total of 279 students. Of those, 67 (24%) are English Language Learners and are served through an integrated and stand-alone ENL program. All of these students are on the Autism Spectrum and their instruction is connected to the Common Core Learning Standards. All of our ELLs take the NYSESLAT every spring. The vast majority of our students scored at the Entering level on the 2018 NYSESLAT. This is largely due to the fact that most of our students are mandated for alternate assessment and therefore, do not participate in standardized testing (except for NYSESLAT). P77K is spread across 4 sites in the Borough of Brooklyn. Of these 67 ELLs, 56 are mandated for 6:1:1 configuration, 8 are mandated for 8:1:1 configuration, and 3 are mandated for 12:1:1 configuration. The represented languages of the students in P77K are Russian, Spanish, Arabic, Haitian Creole, French, Polish, Bengali, Urdu, Cantonese and Mandarin. All ELLs at P77K are invited to participate in the Title III program. In order to determine which students will participate, letters are sent home in English and in the families' home languages and phone calls are made to survey interest. Due to the geographic locations of the students and the fact that the large majority of them are mandated for door-to-door bussing and in 6:1:1 and 8:1:1 configurations, it is difficult to design a program in which all ELLs can attend. Therefore, the program will run at the 164 site on Wednesdays and Thursdays from 3:00 p.m. to 5:00 p.m. for 11 weeks beginning in February 2019 (regular school hours end at 2:50). One ENL certified teacher, one special education teacher and one paraprofessional will work in a 6:1:1 configuration to provide integrated instruction just as instruction is delivered during the regular school day. Since the program will take place after regular school hours, an administrator will also be present in order to supervise at the site. Administrators' regular hours are until 3:20, thus will be paid per session from 3:30 - 5:00. The goal of the Title III program is to increase communication and literacy skills as well as promote appropriate social skills. The language of instruction for the Title III program will be English. The theme of the program for the 2018/2019 school year will be General Social Skills. During the after-school program, students will increase their communication and literacy skills through meaningful social interactions. According to Vygotsky, social interaction plays a fundamental role in the development of cognition (Vygotsky, 1978). He theorized that community plays a central role in the process of "making meaning." Students will explore various real-life situations, such as shopping at a toy store, taking a bus or a train, and ordering food at a fast food restaurant. They will study appropriate behaviors and dialogues associated with these and other situations and will act them out with their peers. They will be encouraged to use their expressive language to communicate with each other during these role play activities. According to The Interaction Hypothesis (1996), proposed by Long and investigated by Pica, the development of language proficiency is promoted by face-to-face interaction and communication. It claims that the effectiveness of comprehensible input is greatly increased when learners have to negotiate for meaning. The process of face-to-face interaction may also result in learners receiving more input from their interlocutors than they would otherwise. 2018-19 CEP 48  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Keeping this in mind, after students have practiced scripted dialogues with each other, they will be given the opportunity to participate in authentic interactions with their peers. These interactions should mimic those dialogues previously studied and discussed, but should also incorporate original communication if possible and appropriate. The study of social stories is one teaching method that will be used to explore appropriate behavior and dialogue in various settings. By reading these stories, students will learn the expected behaviors for a variety of settings. An example of this would be using a "quiet voice" in a movie theater as opposed to an "outdoor voice" used on the playground. Another example is to teach turn-taking on a ride at the playground as opposed to fighting over the ride. Students will be given several opportunities to compare and contrast behaviors that are appropriate in different settings. Students will also create their own social stories that demonstrate what they have learned regarding how to behave and interact with peers in various settings. These book-making projects will give them an opportunity to develop their reading and writing skills in addition to the listening and speaking skills practiced during the role play activities. The program will be organized into 2-3 week units, each unit focusing on a different setting or situation and the behaviors associated with each. They will study the appropriate behaviors, role-play, and create their own books for each unit. Students' IEP goals will be incorporated into instruction and lessons will be connected the the Common Core Learning Standards. Materials to be purchased for the program will include book-making supplies, such as a printer, ink, laminating supplies and craft supplies. We will also purchase various props to be used during role-playing activities (cash register, uniforms, etc.) and technology to support communication (GoTalk) and presentation (ELMO projector). Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: In an effort to develop the staff members' skills in the area of teaching social situations, a book study focused on running a program based on proper social interactions will be held. The book entitled, "Making Sense of Social Situations: How to Run a Group-based Intervention Program for Children with Autism Spectrum Disorders", by Albert Cotugno will be used. These professional development meetings will take place the first Tuesday of each month (beginning in March 2019) from 3:00pm to 4:30pm at 164 for four sessions. All staff members involved will read assigned chapters before each meeting and be prepared to discuss salient points and how to incorporate them into their instructional practices. The chapters (and topics) to be studied will be "Socialization, Social Competence, and Social Skills," "Understanding Individuals with Autism Spectrum Disorders (ASD)," and "Stress and Anxiety Control and Management: A Core Variable," and "Basic Principles in the Development of Social Competence and in Social Skill Building." 2018-19 CEP 49  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: Title III information is disseminated to parents through letters written in English and respective home languages. Interpreters are available for each of the languages represented by the ELL population for any oral information presented at meetings and workshops, etc. An orientation will take place on a designated day before the program begins at 9:30 a.m. It will take place at 164 and will be facilitated by the unit coordinator, Elizabeth McShea, as the parent coordinator is on leave. This meeting will give parents an overview of the topics and activities planned and give them an opportunity to ask any questions they may have about the program. Parents will be invited to attend sessions with their children. They will be involved in the role-playing activities, such as, "Going shopping with my mom/dad," and "Taking my family to a pizzeria." During these activities parents and the students will be given the opportunity to act out the real life situations that they may encounter in the real world. Parents will also be involved in the book-making projects. They will be exposed to instruction that is tailored to the needs of their students so that they may incorporate these strategies at home. The books that are made during the after-school program will be taken home so that the families can read them together and practiced what they have learned. During the last day of the program, a culmination showcase will be held at the 164. Parents and family members will be invited to attend the celebration to view their students’ works and an award ceremony will be held to recognize the students’ achievements. Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits) $10,448.11  Per session  Per diem Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. INSTRUCTIONAL PROGRAM 2 teachers x 11 weeks x 4 hours x $60.65 = $5,337.20 1 paraprofessional x 11 weeks x 4 hours x $34.73 = $1528.12 1 administrator x 11 weeks x 3 hours x $63.45 = $2093.85 1 secretary x $37.37 x 8 hrs =$298.96 subtotal: $9258.13 PROFESSIONAL DEVELOPMENT 2 teacher x 4 weeks x 1.5 hours/day x $60.65 = $727.80 2018-19 CEP 50  Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. 1 paraprofessional x 4 weeks x 1.5 hours/day x $34.73 = $208.38 1 administrator x 3 weeks x 1 hours/day x $63.45 = $253.8 subtotal: $1189.98 $10,448.11 0.00 GoTalk 20+AAC Device ($185.07) ELMO BOXI Mobile Projector ($411.43) Canon Printer ($478.98) Toner ($39.60) Laminator ($145.00) Craft Supplies ($177.45) (gloves, glue, glitter, paint sets, modeling clay, crayons, etc.) Props ($223.11) (cash register, career figures, play food, masks, uniforms, tote trays, etc.) USB flash drives ($80.32) printing paper ($105.04) awards ($59.81) Black ballpoint pens ($12.08) $1917.89 0.00 0.00 $12366.00 Purchased services  High quality staff 0.00 $1917.89 and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL 0.00 0.00 0.00 2018-19 CEP 51  Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. $12366.00 2018-19 CEP 52  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 75 School Name 77K Borough Brooklyn School Number 75 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Ebony Russell Coach ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Danny Rodriguez/Maria Aleksina Teacher/Subject Area Teacher/Subject Area Related-Service Provider Superintendent Assistant Principal Carmela Montanile Coach School Counselor Edward O'Connor Parent Parent Coordinator Denise Horsford Field Support Center Staff Member Other (Name and Title) C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 0 2 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 272 2018-19 CEP 53 Total number of ELLs 67 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 24.63%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 1 2 3 4 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? Students at P77K are assessed throughout the year using a number of vehicles. The vast majority of our students participate in alternate assessments; currently, this includes all our English Language Learners (ELLs). The Student Annual Needs Determination Inventory (SANDI) is administered at all grade levels twice a year to assess literacy skills as well as other behavioral and academic needs. The Formative Assessment of Standards Tasks (FAST) is also used in conjunction with SANDI as part of a comprehensive assessment tool for students with significant cognitive impairments and delays. Additionally, all alternate assessment students participate in New York State Alternate Assessment (NYSAA) beginning in third grade. Once data is collected from these assessments, they are used to directly influence the development of IEP goals and to drive instruction to meet the academic needs of all students. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? 2018-19 CEP 54  The effort is supported by the unit coordinators at many of our sites. Teachers, paraprofessionals, and the parent coordinator also support these efforts. Instructional coaches and model teachers support pedagogy by assisting and showing how to perform these assessments. Collective group teams and cohort teams also support teachers in assessing students. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? The success of the ENL program at P77K is assessed in a number of ways. The continued success of our ELLs on NYSAA each year is a direct indication of their academic success as measured by an appropriate assessment. Baseline/benchmark assessments used at P77K are SANDI, FAST and Attainment Math Curriculum. Using Running Record and Reading A-Z teachers are able to assess not only what students can read but the level of comprehension for each student. Teachers at our school also assess baseline/benchmark levels of students by observing students and collecting student work product. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? The unit coordinators at P77K as well as teachers, paraprofessionals and the parent coordinator are all instructed to use the summative data and intervene when necessary. The school's administrative staff conducts classroom inter-visitations to ensure that the needs of our ELLs are met. Mentors help newer teachers address the appropriate interventions to guide instructional planning for our ELLs. Instructional Coaches and Model Teachers also assist staff in intervention strategies when planning instruction for our ELLs. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] P77K provides all students with layers of intervention and individualized instruction to meet their specific needs. All students have an Individualized Education Program (IEP) through which specialized academic goals are developed. Additionally, the instructional interventions necessary to meet these goals are implemented through special education teachers, ENL teachers and related service providers. Assessment data is continuously collected through the use of data folios and teacher-made rubrics, as well as formal assessments such as NYSAA and SANDI/FAST. Just as in the Response to Intervention framework, as students make progress in their academic development, these supports are slowly faded out. It is the ultimate goal that all students move to the least restrictive environment appropriate for them. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. All ELLs at P77K participate in NYSESLAT each year. On the 2017-18 NYSESLAT 0 students scored commanding, 19 students scored emerging, 3 students scored expanding and 7 students scored transitioning. The remaining 39 students scored entering. Many of our students are non-verbal and lack the fine motor skills necessary to write. These scores largely reflect the nature of the students' disabilities and not specifically their language acquisition as standardized assessments are not appropriate for students at P77K. Many ELLs have scored successfully on NYSAA, specifically the ELA portion, due to this assessment being more aptly suited to demonstrate our students’ strengths. Students are assessed through NYSAA using individualized, alternate methods rather than a standardized approach. Data from NYSAA, SANDI/FAST, student portfolios and classroom observations are predominantly the driving forces used when classroom teachers, ENL teachers, cluster teachers, and related service providers collaborate for IEP goal and instructional development. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? These findings are disseminated by informing teacher-teams and at cohort meetings. Technology is also used. Some of the technology used is Microsoft 365 and a communication app called Remind. A newsletter called "Administrative Happenings" is also a tool used to disseminate findings from evaluations. The parent coordinator circulates a quarterly newsletter that includes findings related to student evaluations as well. Part IV: ELL Programming 2018-19 CEP 55  Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. Students at P77K are in classes with either a 6:1:1 or 8:1:1 student-to-staff ratio. These students are ungraded but grouped according to age. Each class has students with no more than three (3) years difference in age. Self-contained classes are mixed heterogeneously with respect to proficiency levels. ELLs at P77K are served through an integrated program provided by one (1) fully-licensed ENL teacher. This teacher collaborates daily with classroom teachers, cluster teachers and related service providers to ensure that instruction is aligned with the needs of ELLs within each classroom. Using the integrated model, the ENL teacher pushes in to co-teach with other teachers. b. TBE program. If applicable. P77K presently does not have a TBE program. c. DL program. If applicable. P77K presently does not have a dual language program. 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? ESSA requires that local programs for ELLs comply with state mandates regarding content, frequency and direction of ENL language services. Furthermore, the regulations underscore that the goal of ENL and bilingual instruction is to ensure that ELLs become proficient in listening, speaking, reading and writing in English. According to C.R. Part 154, students in grades Kindergarten through eight at the entering and emerging levels must receive 360 minutes a week of explicit ENL instruction. Those students at the expanding level must receive 180 minutes of explicit ENL instruction and 180 minutes of ELA instruction per week. At the high school level, students at the entering level must receive 360 minutes a week of explicit ENL instruction, students at the emerging level must receive 360 minutes of ENL instruction and students at the expanding level must receive 180 minutes of ENL instruction and 180 minutes of ELA instruction. At P77K, ELLs are spread across four sites in Brooklyn and our ENL teacher travels to each site to work with each of them. All ELLs in P77K receive the maximum number of units of ENL instruction possible within the staffing restraints of the school. Because there is no self-contained bilingual program at P77K, students do not receive Home Language Arts (HLA). However, students who are mandated for bilingual services receive native language support from an alternate placement paraprofessional who speaks the student’s native language and English. In addition to ENL, all students, regardless of English proficiency, receive English Language Arts from a classroom teacher and a literacy cluster teacher. Expanding level students receive a minimum of 180 minutes of ELA each week. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. To ensure that students meet the standards and pass the required state and local assessments, ENL instructors follow the Common Core Learning Standards, the New Language Arts Progressions and incorporate ENL strategies such as the Cognitive Academic Language Learning Approach (CALLA), Total Physical Response (TPR), Language Experience, Whole Language, graphic organizers, plus multi-sensory approaches used in conjunction with augmentative communication devices and Mayer-Johnson picture symbols. The use of technology, including SmartBoards, iPads, digital cameras, and computers, is incorporated to give students additional instructional support. ENL materials are infused throughout all aspects of instruction. The school and classroom libraries include a variety of books of all levels that reflect the backgrounds, needs and strengths of ELLs. Instruction in the ENL program is delivered in English. At P77K, all students in 6:1:1 and 8:1:1 classes receive content area instruction within the classroom through a variety of 2018-19 CEP 56  approaches, including, but not limited to, small group, individual and community-based instruction. P77K utilizes a balanced literacy approach throughout the program to enhance students’ literacy skills and academic performance. The school utilizes the Unique curriculum across all grades. Unique is an online, standards-based system that provides differentiated lessons and tasks across all content areas through thematic units of study. Equals is a math curriculum used in the elementary grades of P77K. It is aligned with State, Alternate and Common Core Standards and encompasses pre-readiness, fundamental, and higher order math skills for students with disabilities. The Touchmath program is used throughout our school’s program. It capitalizes on the tactile/kinesthetic preferences of learners while developing their visual and auditory skills. As children engage in the multi-sensory approach they begin to internalize the connection between concrete number experiences and more abstract mathematical conceptualization. All classroom instruction is delivered in English, with the support of an alternate placement paraprofessional for those students who are mandated for bilingual education per their IEP. All ELLs participate in these activities with the added support of integrated ENL services. Students in P77K’s inclusion program receive content area instruction through the support of general education content area teachers, Special Education Teacher Support Service (SETSS) and a paraprofessional. These staff members collaborate, along with ENL teachers and related service providers, to adapt the general education curriculum to meet the needs of the students and assist them in achieving proficiency on state mandated assessments. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? Although there is no Transitional Bilingual program at this time, students who are mandated for bilingual service and receive the support of an alternate placement paraprofessional are informally evaluated in their native language throughout the day. They provide native language support through methods such as checking for understanding and anecdotal observations. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status Presently, P77K has no Students with Interrupted Formal Education (SIFE). In the event that a SIFE were to enroll in P77K, the staff would differentiate instruction to assist in developing his/her language. The staff would work to develop initial literacy and communication skills in the student’s native language. This would be done in a nurturing environment in order to facilitate language proficiency. The student would receive support from an ENL teacher and an alternate placement paraprofessional who speaks his/her native language and English. Among strategies used to support this student would be Total Physical Response, the Natural Approach, and small-group instruction. Newcomers admitted to P77K are worked with to develop literacy and communication skills in both English and the students' native languages. Paraprofessionals who speak the students' native languages work to help Newcomers at P77K. Newcomers are invited to participate in the school’s Title III after-school program. Various strategies used to facilitate language acquisition include, but are not limited to, Collaborative Learning Approach, Total Physical Response, the Natural Approach, the Language Experience Approach, small-group instruction and one-on-one tutoring. To support ELLs who have received ENL service for four to six years, several strategies are practiced. They include but are not limited to, Total Physical Response, Natural Approach, continuous small-group instruction, and Collaborative Learning Approach. Additionally, these students are invited to participate in the Title III after-school program. In order to support long-term ELLs at P77K, several instructional interventions are implemented. In P77K’s Title III after-school program, long-term ELLs receive support through the integration of arts and technology into the curriculum, promoting creativity and literacy. Additionally, long-term ELLs receive support through continuous small-group instruction. Former ELLs are entitled to 90 minutes of integrated ENL a week for 2 years. Presently, only one ELL has received a score of commanding on NYSESLAT and is considered a former ELL. In the event that more students should score commanding, they would continue to receive support through small-group instruction as available 2018-19 CEP 57  for two years. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? All students at P77K are diagnosed with Austism Spectrum Disorder (ASD) and have an IEP based on their specific needs and abilities. Students represent varying degrees of ASD as well as English language proficiency. All instruction, including explicit ENL instruction, is differentiated based on students' abilities and IEP goals. Methods for differentiation include, but are not limited to, small-group instruction, one-on-one instruction, pair work, hands-on activities, use of adapted materials and visual supports, incorporation of multiple intelligences in lessons, and use of augmentative communication devices. With the exception of students in the inclusion program, classes are organized in a 6:1:1, 8:1:1, or 12:1:1 student-to-staff ratio to provide small-group instruction as mandated per students' IEPs. Students receive instruction from licensed Special Education teachers and additional support by paraprofessionals and related service providers according to individual mandates. All instructional staff members utilize Mayer Johnson picture symbols in an effort to provide visual supports and enhance learning, as well as multi- sensory approaches to teaching content material. The use of technology, such as iPads, SmartBoards, digital cameras and augmentative communication devices is integrated throughout the curriculum to ensure that content material is accessible and appropriately modified for all students. Students in the inclusion program receive additional support from their SETSS provider and a paraprofessional who work collaboratively with general education teachers to adapt the general education curriculum to fit the students' needs. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? The majority of the students at P77K are in the most restrictive environment that the New York City Department of Education has to offer. It is our goal to help all students progress in their development and move on to a less restrictive environment, if and when it is appropriate. To achieve this goal, classroom teachers, cluster teachers, ENL teachers, related service providers and paraprofessionals collaborate daily to create lessons that are differentiated and scaffolded to meet the needs of every student. Related service providers and the ENL teachers integrate to self-contained classes and collaboratively teach with classroom and cluster teachers, adding their own expertise in addressing students’ needs. Through the use of a team-teaching model, teachers and related service providers are given the flexibility to adapt curricula to meet the specific needs of each student. This also provides flexibility in scheduling as the students are able to receive mandated services and supports without removing them from their classrooms and content area instruction, ultimately preparing them for progression into less restrictive environments. Students who are in the inclusion program spend the majority of their school day in general education classes alongside their typically developing peers. This provides them the opportunity to engage in appropriate social interactions with their peers as well as to develop academically through peer-to-peer tutoring. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. It is a priority that content area material be accessible and comprehensible for all ELLs. To see that this is a reality, classroom and cluster teachers collaborate daily with ENL teachers to ensure that all lessons and activities are properly differentiated for ELLs. Intervention strategies are used to support all ELLs, from newcomers to long-term students. Among the intervention strategies used to support ELA instruction is the Cognitive Academic Language Learning Approach (CALLA), a content-based ENL instruction model. Additionally, ELLs receive support in content areas, such as science and social studies, through small-group instruction, hands-on learning and one-on-one instruction. On a case-by-case basis, students are provided with tutoring in specific subject areas to further their academic success. All instruction is delivered in English, with the exception of support from alternate placement paraprofessionals who speak the students’ native languages and English. Languages represented by bilingual paraprofessionals are Spanish, Russian, Haitian Creole, French, and Chinese. In addition, bilingual dictionaries and 2018-19 CEP 58  written materials are available in Spanish, Russian, Polish, Chinese, Arabic, Bengali, Urdu, Haitian Creole and French to support ELLs with content material. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? Through the RESO-A grant, three sites received funds to upgrade a computer lab and purchase new computers, SmartBoards and iPads for the classrooms, allowing opportunities for students to improve their technological proficiency. Early childhood classes take part in therapeutic horseback riding, a program with research-based success in helping students with autism. Students in all self-contained classes participate in a daily yoga session through the use of the District 75’s Get Ready to Learn program. ELLs are all invited to take part in all aforementioned activities. In addition to the aforementioned technology and programs, this school will use KNeoworld, a socio-emotional gaming program during the 20-17-18 school year. The program is designed to develop academic and life skills for success in both areas. Passport to Social Studies is another resource to be used to help students make connections between complex ideas and their own lives. The First Author writing curriculum enables special needs students to become writers. It gives educators tools to help students write and then measure their own progress. Fundations is another new program to be used that teaches students to read using phonics, high-frequency word study, reading fluency, vocabulary and comprehension strategies. Vocational Connections is a curriculum that empowers students to explore their vocational image. With this curriculum, students will get a sense of their talents and interests. They will be able to articulate preferred ways of learning new tasks, skills and information and learn interview skills and resume writing to be able to transition into the workplace. These are among the many new programs and improvements to be used this 2018-19 school year. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? Presently there are no bilingual programs at P77K. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. This year will be the eleventh year for P77K’s Title III after-school program. It will incorporate literacy to support ELLs’ academic success. The goal of the Title III program is to increase communication and literacy skills. The language of instruction for the Title III program is English. The program will focus on enhancing literacy and communication skills through understanding the elements of a story. Themes that will be discussed are character, setting, plot, theme, point of view, style and tone. The reasoning for this is that the more familiar students become with elements of a story the better they will understand and critically analyze stories. This will help to support their comprehension and literacy development. Invitation letters will be sent to parents of all ELLs and will be translated into the family’s native language. Additionally, translators are available for any and all in-person meetings and phone conversations. Presently, the Title III program is the only after-school program at P77K. However, ELLs are invited to take part in all activities that take place during the regular school day. ELLs also take part in school plays that involve acting, singing and dance during the regular school day. The grand finale of these activities involves a show where parents and others are invited to see the show. Afterwards lunch is served and students and audience members interact with each other. Within these shows ELLs are allowed to participate fully so that they are represented as part of the project. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. ELLs receive support in P77K through the use of various instructional materials. Classrooms are stocked with leveled libraries including books in English, ELLs’ native languages, and bilingual dictionaries. Also, teacher-made materials, puppets, manipulatives, Mayer Johnson symbols, computer software, and graphic organizers are used to enhance learning. All self- contained classrooms have SmartBoards that are used daily to enhance lessons and make content more engaging. Each site is equipped with a laptop cart that teachers and students can use to assist with instructional practices. Each site also has iPads that can be checked out to support instruction. Additionally, non-verbal ELLs use augmentative communication devices and/or a personalized Picture Exchange Communication System (PECS) to foster communication between themselves and others. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? 2018-19 CEP 59  Currently there is no TBE or Dual Language program at P77K. All instruction in the ENL program is delivered in English. However, for those students mandated for bilingual instruction, an alternate placement paraprofessional who speaks the child’s native language and English provides native language support as needed. Bilingual dictionaries and culturally diverse books are available in the classroom libraries to provide additional support for all ELLs. Bilingual related service providers who speak Spanish, Russian, Chinese and Polish are also available. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. P77K serves students between the ages of five (5) and twenty-one (21) and provides age-appropriate materials for all students, regardless of age. These are found throughout all classrooms, related service offices, computer labs, and recreational areas. Students at the elementary level receive instruction and required services that correspond to appropriate grade-level state standards and individual students' needs. Additionally, students at the secondary level receive instruction and required services that correspond to appropriate grade-level state standards and individual students' needs. When necessary, materials and instruction are adapted to meet the needs of the students and to ensure that all instructional materials are fully accessible for all students. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? Resources are shared between the co-located schools at the 902 site. The principals meet through council meetings and discuss the needs of the students of both schools. Additionally, P77K's inclusion program places our special needs students into the classrooms of the general education school housed in this building. Within this program, students of both schools share educational resources and instruction. Furthermore, both administrations practice collaborative programming so that the schedules and needs of both schools are addressed and staff of both schools is aware of the necessities of our students. There is an intermingling of staff at all times. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). All newly enrolled students, along with their families, are given a tour of the school’s program in an effort to familiarize them with the culture and expectations of the school as well as the resources available to them. This tour is conducted by either the parent coordinator or an administrator on site. As needed, translators are available to assist parents during these tours. Additionally, parents of newly enrolled students are invited to attend a parent informational meeting at the beginning of the school year. Translators are available at this meeting as needed. The parent coordinator and the family worker diligently work with families of newly enrolled students to ensure a smooth transition for both the students and their families. Families are also informed that their children are invited to attend our summer program Chapter 683 prior to the school year. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? Presently, there are no foreign language electives available at P77K. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? Presently, there is no Dual Language Program available at P77K. 2018-19 CEP 60  Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? To ensure that all teachers teaching ELLs are familiar with second language strategies we provide targeted professional development on both the theory and practice of second language acquisition. Professional development is provided through weekly grade meetings, staff conferences and one to one modeling. We have coaches and teacher leaders that provide professional development to all staff. All teachers are part of an inquiry team that meets weekly to look at student work and share instructional strategies, identify scaffolds, language structures and functions for the reading and writing units of study. Teachers are listed to go to workshops of all areas of the common core. Some of these workshops are the Writing Institute, Attainment Math, Stem Science, Literacy Writing and Jose P. Teachers go to these workshops throughout the school year. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. P77K will continue to hold professional development for all staff members in dealing with ELL students. Professional development will be scheduled during dedicated professional development days. Professional development will be provided in small cohort meetings and staff members in attendance will include the ENL teacher, classroom teachers, cluster teachers, guidance counselors, psychologists, speech therapists, occupational therapists, physical therapists and administrators. The ENL teacher will attend professional development instructional workshops throughout the school year and turnkey the information and resources gathered to other staff members at P77K who work with ELLs. The school’s assigned District Coach will provide support through mentoring teachers in designing and developing standards-based lessons and assessments and engaging students in the CCLS. The schools assigned District ELL coaches also administer professional development sessions so that the ENL teacher continues growth in ELL instruction. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? Information regarding assessments, Common Core Learning Standards, state standards, and our school program are discussed with parents during the Educational Planning Conference at the CSE level. Our school provided an orientation for all parents, including those of newly enrolled ELLs, in early September 2018 and interpreters were available for the event. If the parent speaks a language other than our "in-school-translation-team" speaks, a Language Identification Guide chart will be shown to the parent so that we can identify which language they speak. Then a Translation Unit is called. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Workshops are offered to parents in their native languages. Parent trainings are also offered in the native languages of the parents. Pertinent literature is also distributed in the native languages of the parents. In-school translation services are available in Mandarin, Cantonese, Russian, Bengali, Urdu, Hindi and Spanish. If the parent speaks a language other than our "in-school-translation-team" speaks, a Language Identification Guide chart will be shown to the parent so that we can identify which language they speak. Then a Translation Unit is called. 2018-19 CEP 61  Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Paste response here: 2018-19 CEP 62 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Ebony Russell, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 CEP 63  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: P77K School DBN: D75K77 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Ebony Russell Title Principal Carmela Montanile Assistant Principal Denise Horsford Parent Coordinator Danny Rodriguez/Maria Aleksina ENL/Bilingual Teacher Parent Teacher/Subject Area Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach Edward O'Connor School Counselor Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 2018-19 CEP 64  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 75K077 School Name: P77K Superintendent: Kettler, Louiss The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of conducted by the Field this plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No (*Primary) William Petrowitz Technology Coordinator/Programmer/Data Specialist Yes Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. Notices are posted at the front door of our main office describing the translation services we provide. Also, Home Language Identification Survey and ATS reports are used to discern the home language of all of our ELL's in our school. Parents indicate on our emergency contact blue cards their prefered language for contacting them at home as well as on the Home Language Identification Survey. We are able to learn with certainty when translation and interpretation needs are required from the ATS reports and survey information. Bilingual staff assist in translation and interpretation of needs of parents and guardians. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. 2018-19 CEP 65  Arabic Bengali (Bangla in Bangladesh) Chinese Any Cantonese Haitian Creole Mandarin English Polish Russian Spanish Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral 2 5 48 0 0 0 285 1 2 31 0.53 1.34 12.83 0 0 0 76.2 0.27 0.53 8.29 2 3 36 3 2 8 285 1 4 3 0.53 0.8 9.63 0.8 0.53 2.14 76.2 0.27 0.53 8.56 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. There are no languages other than the ones listed that represent at least 10% of the school's population. Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency How do you Distributed to Families 9/14, 10/6, 11/9, 12/11, 1/12, 2/5, 3/9, 4/6, 5/4, 6/4 plan to translate? Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. Translated documents are prepared by the Translation Interpretation Unit well before calendar events. In the event of an Parent workshop flyers - PTA notices - 2018-19 CEP 66  IEP meeting notifications - Parent-Teacher notices - School wide events - After-school program information - Parent support group information - unscheduled event, in-house staff can provide translations. Additionally, newsletters are sent out quarterly; the first one is disseminated in September. These newsletters are to inform parents of ELLs of events at school as well as information on supportive agencies. When communicating with parents, teachers often use Google translate as well. P77K currently does not have a PTA Notices go out 45 days before IEP meeting Notices go out daily 9/14, 10/6, 11/9, 12/11, 1/12, 2/5, 3/9, 4/6, 5/4, 6/4 Notices go out roughly 45 days before programs start P77K has not yet started parent support groups 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school IEP meetings - plan to provide interpretation service(s)? Fall (November 17, 2017) and Spring (May 10, 2018) Translated documents are prepared by the 2018-19 CEP 67  Parent-teacher conferences - Translation Interpretation Unit well before calendar events. In the event of an unscheduled event, members of staff are often asked to translate. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. "School Messenger" is an electronic mass phone communication tool that translates to multiple languages utilized by our school. It is programmed to make mass calls during an emergency. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. The Language Access Coordinator has given a presentation on 9/5/17 to inform staff of the translation and interpretation services available to communicate with parents of ELLs. The school's administrative staff will give professional development sessions informing staff of translation and interpretation services. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) A sign for translation and interpretation services in the appropriate languages has been posted near the main office entrance. Our bilingual staff provide translation when needed. The Parents' Guide to Language Access in DOE translated languages is available in our school's main office. We also use the DOE over the phone interpretation services and a language identification guide is at the parents disposal at the security desk and at the main office. This is so that non-English speaking parents may find their language; the main office will be contacted and a bilingual staff member will be contacted for translation. 2018-19 CEP 68  Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? Parent surveys are sent home in September and June. It allows our ELL's parents to rate the services they have received during the school year and to gain input on our programs for our ENL students. The data allows our school to make changes in our program planning and services for our ELL's students if necessary. 2018-19 CEP 69 
