2018-19 SCHOOL COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (SCEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 22K078 School Name: J.H.S. 078 ROY H. MANN Principal: ANTHONY CUSUMANO 2018-19 SCEP-FL 1  School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) Section 4: SCEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 SCEP-FL 2  Section 1: School Information Page School Information School Number (DBN): 22K078 (718) 251-3439 Fax: Email Address: Acusuma@schools.nyc.gov School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Roy H. Mann – I.S. 78 22K078 6-8 1420 East 68 th Street (718) 763-4701 Phone Number: Anthony Cusumano School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Geographical District: 22 Superintendent’s Office Address: Anthony Cusumano Matthew Lyons NandanieAppana Pauline Siringo Jennifer Larson N.A. N.A. N/A District Information Julia Bove Superintendent: 5619 Flatlands Avenue JBove@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: (718)968-6117 Phone Number: (718)968-6252 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) 2018-19 SCEP-FL 3  Brooklyn South FSC: Executive Director’s Office Address: MauriciereDe Gova Executive Director: 415 89th Street, Brooklyn, NY 11209 mdegovi@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: (718) 759-3952 Phone Number: (718) 759-4879 Fax: 2018-19 SCEP-FL 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the SCEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) AnthonyCusumano MatthewLyons NandanieAppana Jennifer Larson N.A. N.A. N.A. Philip Maravolo Pauline Siringo *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/Teacher Member/Teacher 2018-19 SCEP-FL 5  Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Jeanne Cirone Melissa Bell PusullaReyes Michael Desena Member/Parent Member/Parent Member/Parent Member/Teacher Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ 2018-19 SCEP-FL 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the School Comprehensive Educational Plan The School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) is a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. The process of developing and implementing the SCEP is aligned to the Framework for Great Schools. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding SCEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department has established programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students supports to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and SCEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint for continuous improvement that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to increase student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 7  In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five (5) goals and action plans that align with the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. Accountability Tools and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is informed by the New York State Education Department’s (NYSED) Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) Tenets, the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Rubric, School Quality Guide and other quantitative and qualitative data tools. NYSED’s Six DTSDE Tenets To strengthen the existing system, the NYSED has developed a tool that captures the best practices from each of the current tools called the Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness. This new tool encompasses multiple instruments such as interviews, classroom observations and surveys. The protocol will begin with a clear and cogent statement of the optimal conditions of an effective school and the instruments comprising the protocol will measure how close or far away a particular school is to the optimal conditions identified. Once reviewed, the school and district will create a strategic plan to address the areas in need of improvement. All current Priority and Focus Schools and Focus Districts must use the tool; districts that are required to submit District Comprehensive Improvement Plans and Comprehensive Educational Plans also will use the tool. The DTSDE protocol includes a rubric, which identifies clear and coherent expectations of the optimal conditions of an effective school and school district across the following six tenets:  Tenet 1: District Leadership and Capacity  Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions  Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support  Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions  Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health, and  Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement 2018-19 SCEP-FL 8  NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The 2017-18 Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) I. II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Structures for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the SCEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the SCEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. Next Steps for SCEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 9   Step 3: In Part 1A of the Section 5: Needs Assessment indicate the Statement of Practice (SOP) from the DTSDE Tenets that will be addressed in the action plan. Schools that received an Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) School Review should use the recommendations from the review to select their SOPs. Schools that did not undergo an IIT review should select SOPs informed by the major findings/recommendations from your most recent Quality Review (QR) or Central-led Review (CLR), and other qualitative and quantitative data.  Step 4: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 5: Build consensus around activities, strategies and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 6: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 7: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 10  1. What is your school’s mission statement? Section 4: SCEP Overview At Roy H. Mann, The School for Architectural Design and Innovative Technology, our mission is to provide all students with engaging, rigorous, and technology based learning opportunities, as well as meaningful enrichment opportunities that prepare them for college and career readiness, in alignment with the Common Core Learning Standards. In partnership with staff, families, and the community, we foster the emotional, social and intellectual growth of our students in order to prepare them to reach their full academic potential and become outstanding citizens. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. ● Roy H. Mann current total student population is 579 students ● General Education - 66.84% ● Special Education - 25.91% English Language Learners – 7.25% Attendance Rate 2016-2017 – 93.50% Partnerships – ● Millennium Development will provide after school enrichment and sports programs for our students. ● Girls for Gender Equity Urban Leadership Program will provide after school academic enrichment and arts programs for our students. ● Marquis Studios Art Residents Program will provide after school dance and art program for our students. Instructional Focus - Teachers will continue to utilize online academic enrichment programs, (Achieve3000, IReady, and ESL Reading Smart) to collect data that informs instruction, which will lead to improved students’ ELA and Math skills. Teachers will receive targeted data for ENL students to support them in differentiating instruction. Ambassadors will attend offsite Professional Learning sessions to turn key information in order to build content knowledge and teacher capacity. All students will be immersed in our Schoolwide Enrichment Model (SEM) to foster positive relationships and social growth. Our enrichment clusters, as well as our embedded organizational skills program, will promote creativity and collaboration, in support of college and career readiness and citizenship. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 11  We currently have: 42 ELL students - Students require push in and pull out services 150 Special Education Students -  5 Students who receive related services only  17 SETSS students who receive SETSS pull out services five times per week  58 ICT students who receive between 15 - 20 periods per week of ICT services  70 Self-Contained students who receive 20 -25 periods per week of small group instruction (12 or less) in their major subject classes 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. Schools Strengths - ● Establishing a culture for learning that communicates high expectations to staff, students, and families ● Developing teacher pedagogy from a coherent set of beliefs about how students learn best that is informed by the instructional shifts and the Danielson Framework for Teaching ● Providing meaningful enrichment opportunities for our students through our SEM clusters ● Collecting targeted student data through online enrichment in ELA and Math Schools Accomplishments – ● Rated Excellent on the 2016 - 2017 School Quality Snapshot in Rigorous Instruction, Collaborative Teachers, Supportive Environment, Effective School Leadership, Strong Family-Community Ties and Trust and Supportive Environment ● 99% average pass rate in ELA, Math, Social Studies and Science ● Attendance Rate YTD – 93.50% Schools Challenges – 2018-19 SCEP-FL 12  ● 26% of students met State standards on the State English test ● 18% of students met State standards on the State Math test 2018-19 SCEP-FL 13  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 22K078 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 06,07,08 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 567 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 79 79 9 9 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 35 35 8 5 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 85.0% % Attendance Rate 76.9% % Reduced Lunch 6.7% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) 0.4% 9.2% 12.2% % Multi-Racial % Black or African American % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 5.83 0% 0% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 31.9% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No No Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups - Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities N/A NO NO NO NO Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A NO NO NO NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A NO NO High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 85 85 2 92.6% 7.4% 26.1% 70.2% 6.9% 1.6% 4 5% 7.1 20.1% 42% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No Yes NO NO N/A NO NO NO NO N/A NO NO NO N/A N/A N/A NO N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 SCEP-FL 14  Economically Disadvantaged N/A ALL STUDENTS N/A 2018-19 SCEP-FL 15  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 3 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 3.2 The school leader ensures and supports the quality implementation of a systematic plan of rigorous and coherent curricula appropriately aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS) that is monitored and adapted to meet the needs of students. Teachers develop and ensure that unit and lesson plans used include data-driven instruction (DDI) protocols that are appropriately aligned to the CCLS and NYS content standards and address student achievement needs. The school leader and teachers have developed a comprehensive plan for teachers to partner within and across all grades and subjects to create interdisciplinary curricula targeting the arts, technology, and other enrichment opportunities. Teachers implement a comprehensive system for using formative and summative assessments for strategic short and long-range curriculum planning that involves student reflection, tracking of, and ownership of learning. 3.3 3.4 3.5 SOP(s) Addressed X Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Based on the 2016-2017 Quality Review: ● Although students regularly self-assess, they have yet to demonstrate the independent use of strategies for ongoing, meaningful revision leading to their academic achievement. Based on feedback from the 2017 - 2018 Spring Principals Performance Observation: ● Teachers collect formative and summative data through multiple forms. Teachers should utilize the data they collect to design individualized targeted instruction that best meets the needs of students Strengths – 2018-19 SCEP-FL 16  ● Unit and Lesson Plans are aligned to the Common Core and support student collaboration ● Teachers have an opportunity to within and across grades and subjects through Inquiry Team Meetings and Common Planning Time built into their programs Areas of Needs – ● Ensure students receive individualized targeted instruction as a result of formative and summative assessment Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 100% of our ELA teachers will have utilized Achieve3000 and 100% of our math teachers will have utilized I-Ready Math, assessing student’s progress as measured through monthly data reports in order to provide students with targeted instruction based on their areas of need. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 17  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Purchase Skedula Online Grading and Assessment Program, Achieve3000, ESL Reading Smart, and I-Ready Math. All Students Create a data team and hold bi-weekly data meetings to analyze data and provide teachers with monthly data reports All Teachers and Students September 2018– June 2019 September 2018 – June 2019 Provide Professional Learning Sessions for teachers focusing on – - Designing Targeted Instruction - Using Data to Drive Instruction All Teachers September 2018– June 2019 Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Assistant Principal Principal and Assistant Principal Assistant Principal - How to Effectively Plan Together during Common Planning time - Using Formative Assessment to Drive Instruction - How to Give Feedback to your Students - How to incorporate Self and Peer Assessment in the classroom Create Unit Plans through Google Documents to refine curricula and ensure aligned unit assessments 3b – Parent and Family Engagement All Teachers September 2018– June 2019 Principal How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. We will Provide Parent Workshops on Rigorous Instruction and supporting students in the shifts from the Common Core to the Next Generation Standards. The Rigorous Instruction Parent Workshop will be held on the first Tuesday in January during Parent Involvement Time and in conjunction with the January PTA Meeting. The shifts from the Common Core to the Next Generation Standards Parent Workshop will be held the first Tuesday in March during Parent Involvement Time and in conjunction with the March PTA Meeting. Both Workshops will be facilitated by Ms. Valentine and Mr. Dougherty 2018-19 SCEP-FL 18  Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Once all pedagogical staff is assigned, we will manage funds to cover OTPS including: 1. Purchase Achieve3000, IReady, Waggle Math and Skedula Online Grading and Assessment Program Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA X PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. We will conduct a data review in February comparing the Mid-Year ELA and Math Assessment to the September Pre Assessments. We will collect teacher Lesson Plans during the cycle of observations for the day of the observation and the previous day to monitor how teachers are using assessment findings to design instruction. We will review these findings during Cabinet Meetings and during our mid-year Cabinet conference. Monitoring of teacher and school wide performance on specific Danielson components link to planning (1E), instruction (3B & 3C) and assessment (3D) to provide additional targeted assistance and opportunities for professional learning as needed. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. The data from the mid-year ELA and Math Assessment from Achieve3000, IReady and Waggle Math in January will be compared to the September Pre-Assessment in ELA and Math from Achieve3000, I-Ready Math. We will also review Advance teacher data to monitor specific Danielson components. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 19  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 5 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 5.2 The school leader establishes overarching systems and understandings of how to support and sustain student social and emotional developmental health and academic success. 5.3 The school articulates and systematically promotes a vision for social and emotional developmental health that is aligned to a curriculum or program that provides learning experiences and a safe and healthy school environment for families, teachers, and students. 5.4 All school stakeholders work together to develop a common understanding of the importance of their contributions in creating a school community that is safe, conducive to learning, and fostering of a sense of ownership for providing social and emotional developmental health supports tied to the school’s vision. 5.5 The school leader and student support staff work together with teachers to establish structures to support the use of data to respond to student social and emotional developmental health needs. SOP(s) Addressed X Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? Based on the 2016 - 2017 School Survey: ● 80% of students say that teachers support them when they are upset Strengths - ● The school cultivates the development of overarching systems and partnerships that support and sustain social and emotional developmental health ● The school promotes a clear vision of social and emotional developmental as outlined in our RTI Plan 2018-19 SCEP-FL 20  ● The school has implemented a whole school level one PBIS Program (Manny Bucks) were student receive positive rewards for doing the right thing ● The school has implemented a School wide Enrichment Program (SEM) were students are given an opportunity to learn a skill in a non-academic area (Cooking, Carpentry, Engineering/Robotics, Dance) ● The school offers mandated and at-risk counseling to struggling students ● The school has a Respect for all Liaison and provides Respect for All instruction to students ● Designated Suicide Prevention Liaison ● Advisory teachers linked to each student to ensure all students have a go to person in the school Areas of Need – All students do not feel a staff member supports them when they are upset Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools –Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, we will continue to utilize a Tier 1 PBIS whole school program (Manny Bucks Program), expand our Tier 2 and Tier 3 RTI program through utilizing a School Mental Health Prevention and Intervention Program Grant to provide at-risk counseling to students, Mental Health educational workshops for students, provide targeted Professional Development for teachers. This will result in a 3% increase in the amount of students who state that teachers support them when they are upset on the 2018-2019 school environment survey. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 21  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff)  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). We will utilize a School Mental Health Prevention and Intervention Program Grant to provide at-risk counseling to students, Mental Health educational workshops for students, provide targeted Professional Development for teachers on student Mental Health and Parent Workshops on student Mental Health. We will continue to utilize positive behavioral support strategies throughout the course of the year. Grade Deans, the school social worker, in conjunction with their grade guidance counselor under the supervision of their grade assistant principal will monitor and lead the Roy H Mann positive behavioral program on their grade. We will also utilize a three tier Response to Intervention system throughout the course of the building with monthly meetings by grade. We will continue to implement a school-wide tier 1 positive behavior support program, “Manny Bucks” which will recognize students for outstanding citizenship by providing them with a “Manny Buck” which can be used to purchase items at the GO store and for other positive events in the school. Struggling students will be given academic (At-Risk SETSS) and behavioral support (At-Risk and Mandated Counseling) and in some cases recommend to the School Assessment Team (when tried intention have failed to show improvement) for evaluation We will continue our SEM program to include sixth, seventh and eighth grade students. All students will select their SEM based on interest. Students will be enrolled in a fall SEM and a spring SEM. SEM classes will meet two consecutive periods per week. The school social worker and guidance counselors will provide at risk counseling to students who express suicidal ideations. The counseling will be organized and overseen by our Suicide Prevention Liaison. In addition, we will create a Community Service Team led by grade deans and the Millennium OST to involve tier three students in beatification and community service projects. We will also have an organization skills class for all incoming sixth grade students. The class is designed to promote basic skills and strategies for success in middle school as well promoting District 22's student wellness goal. All Students, Teachers and Parents September 2018– June 2019 Principal & Assistant Principals All Students, September 2018– June 2019 Assistant Principal, Dean and Teacher All Students September 2018– June 2019 Principal & Assistant Principals All 6th Grade Students September 2018– June 2019 Tier 2 & Tier 3 RTI students Mr. Desena. Ms. Finegan, Ms. Mital, Mr. Galvin, Ms. Laguna,Mr. Lyons, and Ms. D'Aleo 2018-19 SCEP-FL 22  3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. In partnership with our School Mental Health Prevention Clinician, We will Provide Parent Workshops on student mental heath. The Parent Workshop will be held on the first Tuesday in December during Parent Involvement Time and in conjunction with the December PTA Meeting. The workshop will be facilitated by our School Mental Health Prevention Clinician and Gudiance Counselor Ms. Finegan. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Once all pedagogical staff is assigned, we will manage funds to cover OTPS including:  Guidance Counseling per session for at risk counseling, attendance outreach and family outreach Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA X PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. We will review progress in February 2019, analyzing RTI meeting notes, school safety meeting notes and weekly by the principal notes and counseling outreach provided to students. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. RTI meeting notes will be reviewed as well as OORS report data. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 23  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 4 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 4.2 School and teacher leaders ensure that instructional practices and strategies are organized around annual, unit, and daily lesson plans that address all student goals and needs. 4.3 Teachers provide coherent, and appropriately aligned Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS)-based instruction that leads to multiple points of access for all students. 4.4 Teachers and students work together to implement a program/plan to create a learning environment that is responsive to students’ varied experiences and tailored to the strengths and needs of all students. SOP(s) Addressed 4.5 Teachers inform planning and foster student participation in their own learning process by using a variety of summative and formative data sources (e.g., screening, interim measures, and progress monitoring). Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. X 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Based on the 2016 - 2017 Middle School Quality Snapshot: ● 26% of students met State standards on the State English test (41% City Average) ● 18% met State standards on the State Math test (33% City Average) Strengths – ● Teachers utilizing differentiated instruction that meets the needs of students ● Teachers have an opportunity to collaboratively analyze and evaluate student trend data and Common Planning Time built into their programs Areas of Need – 2018-19 SCEP-FL 24  ● Ensuring students receive individualized targeted instruction based on formative and summative assessment ● Ensuring sixth grade students receive organization skills instruction in order to support them in transitioning into middle school ● Ensuring struggling students including SWD and ELL students receive additional remediation in ELA and Math during the school day ● Ensuring struggling students including SWD and ELL students receive additional remediation in ELA and Math after-school ● Provide students with engaging online enrichment lessons in ELA and Math Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2018, 100% of teachers will plan targeted individuated instruction for students through sharing best practices and analyzing student data at monthly ambassador led professional learning, and weekly common planning time, with a targeted focus on ENL students, resulting in a 3% increase in performance as measured by NYC Performance Tasks. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 25  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Lead teachers from each department will attend monthly district lead ambassador meetings focusing on best practices and turn-key information at monthly ambassador lead professional learning content area seminars. Teachers Targeted students including SWD's and ENL's will be provided academic enrichment classes utilizing Achieve3000, I-Ready Math to support them in areas of need as part of their school day. All students will receive separate ELA and Math enrichment classes. Targeted students will receive AIS in ELA and Math after school starting in January 2019 through April 2019. We will also hold a February break Targeted Support AIS Academy for SWD's and Hispanic subgroup students. In addition, we will hold a lunchtime tuturial program for pushable, SWD's and Hispanic subgroup students from February - April. Lowest Third, Students with Disabilities and English Language Learners Teachers will use instructional practices and strategies that are aligned to plans and include accommodations for groups of SWD & ENL student’s after school to provide timely and appropriate instructional interventions and extensions for all students. Teachers will be offered professional learning sessions on supporting ENL students. Students with Disabilities & English Language Learners September 2018 - June 2019 September 2018 - June 2019 Principal and Assistant Principals Principal and Assistant Principals October 2018 – April 2019 Principal and Assistant Principal Teachers will receive quarterly data reports gathered through Achieve3000 and I-Ready Math in order to identify areas and need for each student and plan targeted individualized instruction to support students areas of need. Teachers who teach ENL students will receive targeted data reports for ENL students. In addition, Teachers who teach ENL students will receive updated mid-year ENL targeted data reports in January. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement All Students September 2018 - June 2019 Principal and Assistant Principals How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 26  We will offer Parents of ENL students an opportunity to attend the Mid-Year ENL Saturday Academy with their children. Parents will receive support in mastering the English language and supporting their child's transition into a new school environment. The workshops will be facilitated by Mr. Puleo and Ms. Sett. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Once all pedagogical staff is assigned, we will manage funds to cover OTPS including: 1. Purchase the book, The Middle School Student's Guide to Ruling the World for all sixth grade students 2. Teacher Per Session for ELA/Math after school extended day learning 3. Teacher Per Session for ENL Saturday Mid-Year Academy Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA X PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. In February 2019, we will review the data from targeted assessment data throughout the course of the program. We will review the pre-assessment data and compare it to targeted assessment data gathered each math, analyzing student performance growth. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. The data from Acheive3000 and I-Ready Math will be reviewed bi-weekly. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 27  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 2 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 2.2 The school leader ensures that the school community shares the Specific, Measurable, Ambitious, Results-oriented, and Timely (SMART) goals/mission and long-term vision inclusive of core values that address the priorities outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP). Leaders make strategic decisions to organize programmatic, human, and fiscal capital resources. 2.3 2.4 The school leader has a fully functional system in place aligned to the district's Annual Professional Performance Review (APPR) to conduct targeted and frequent observation and track progress of teacher practices based on student data and feedback. X 2.5 Leaders effectively use evidence-based systems and structures to examine and improve critical individual and school-wide practices as defined in the SCEP (student achievement, curriculum and teacher practices; leadership development; community/family engagement; and student social and emotional developmental health). SOP(s) Addressed Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Based on our 2016-2017 Quality Review: ● Rated Proficent in domain 4.1 - Observe teachers using the Danielson Framework for Teaching along with the analysis of learning outcomes to elevate school-wide instructional practices and implement strategies that promote professional growth and reflection . Strengths – ● The school has a clear articulated Mission and Instructional Focus which is understood and shared across the school community. ● The Principal makes strategic decisions to organize resources concerning human, programmatic and fiscal capital so that school improvement and student goals are achieved. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 28  Areas of Need – ● Track progress of teacher practices based on observations, student data, feedback and professional development opportunities to support student academic growth and ensure teachers are using feedback to design individualized instruction for students Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART– Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. 1. By June 2019, school leaders will ensure 100% of teachers utilize multiple forms of formative and summative assessment practices to design targeted learning objectives that will inform instruction that meets the needs of students, as evidenced by a 3% overall MOTP rating increase in domain 1E (Designing Coherent Instruction). 2018-19 SCEP-FL 29  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) School leaders will continue to utilize a calendar scheduling informal observations and an observation tracking log including next steps for teachers based an analysis of 2018-2019 MOTP data to develop and modify the school wide professional learning plan All Teachers September 2018– June 2019 Principal School leaders will create a list of teacher selected Professional Learning Seminars offered once a month based on identified 2018 - 2019 school goals and areas of weakness. School leaders will also create monthly seminars for teachers explaining and providing strategies for teachers on how to use multiple forms of assessment to design targeted instruction. School leaders will analyze observational monitoring data and learning objectives for patterns and trends across school to identify further targets and to make adjustments to the Professional Learning Plan during Instructional Cabinet Meetings including lessons plans from days leading up to observations to ensure data collected is utilized when planning lessons The Principal will create Targeted Instruction Techniques of the Week as part of a four week cycle (Technique of Week, Assessment Technique of Week, Relationship Building Technique of the Week & Targeted Instruction Technique of the Week) given to teachers on Mondays to support them in their professional growth. All Teachers September 2018– June 2019 Professional Learning Committee All Teachers October 2018– June 2019 Principal and Assistant Principals All Teachers September 2018– June 2019 Principal 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. We will Provide a Parent Workshop on meeting students at their level and intervention strategies. The Parent Workshop will be held on the first Tuesday in March during Parent Involvement Time and in conjunction with the March PTA Meeting. The workshop will be facilitated by Ms. Valentine and Ms. D'Aleo. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment 2018-19 SCEP-FL 30  Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Once all pedagogical staff is assigned, we will accomplish the following through school funding: 1. Teacher per-session to plan Professional Learning Seminars Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA X PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. School Leaders will review the following in February 2019: ●School leaders collect teacher Lesson Plans during the cycle of observations for the day of the observation and the previous day to monitor how teachers are using assessment findings to design instruction. We will review these findings during Cabinet Meetings and during our mid-year Cabinet conference. ● Observation calendar and Observation tracking log to ensure observations are conducted and proper feedback is given with next steps reviewed at Instructional Cabinet Meetings monthly ● Professional Learning Plan to ensure teachers receive targeted professional development throughout the course of the school year reviewed at Professional Learning Committee Meetings quarterly ● Data meetings led by the Principal throughout the course of the year to ensure patterns and student trends are identified reviewed by the Assistant Principal for Data mid-year ● School leaders will create monthly seminars for teachers explaining and providing strategies for teachers on how to use multiple forms of assessment to design targeted instruction. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Data from Advance will be reviewed to analyze teacher MOTP growth in area 1E (Designing Coherent Instruction) from the 2017-2018 school year to the 2018- 2019 school year. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 31  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 6 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 6.2 The school leader ensures that regular communication with students and families fosters their X SOP(s) Addressed high expectations for student academic achievement. 6.3 The school engages in effective planning and reciprocal communication with family and community stakeholders so that student strength and needs are identified and used to augment learning. 6.4 The school community partners with families and community agencies to promote and provide training across all areas (academic and social and emotional developmental health) to support student success. 6.5 The school shares data in a way that promotes dialogue among parents, students, and school community members centered on student learning and success and encourages and empowers families to understand and use data to advocate for appropriate support services for their children. Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Based on the 2016 - 2017 Learning Environment Survey 76% of parents/guardians responded that, since the beginning of the school year, they have been asked or had the opportunity to volunteer time to support their school (for example, spent time helping in classrooms, helped with school-wide events, etc.) sometimes or often Strengths – ● The school offers monthly PTA meetings, monthly parent workshops and family events throughout the course of the school year encouraging parents to volunteer ● The school engages in effective planning and reciprocal communication with family and community stakeholders through the school messenger program ● The school created and updates regularly a school website, www.RoyHMann.com to share information on school events throughout the course of the year 2018-19 SCEP-FL 32  Areas of Need – The school needs to ensure that a larger percentage of parents feel that they have an opportunity to volunteer time to support the school Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, we will create a parent volunteer coordinator position in order to oversee parent involvement and volunteerism, which will result in an a 3%increase on the 2018 - 2019 school survey for parents stating that, since the beginning of the school year, they have been asked or had the opportunity to volunteer time to support their school (for example, spent time helping in classrooms, helped with school-wide events, etc.) sometimes or often. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 33  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Purchase Go Daddy Website & update website. Purchase School Messenger Program to Inform Parents of events at the school and ways they can support the event Parents Create a Parent Volunteer Position for a local community member to work with the PTA and other Parent Volunteers to involve themselves in events that support the school. Create a monthly newsletter for parents informing them of school events and opportunities to support the school Create a monthly cycle for Parent Engagement Tuesdays including workshops Promoting Teacher-Parent Collaboration. In addition, we will also offer Parent Engagement Events (Family Dance Night & Family Dinner to support our goal of engaging the school community. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Parent Coordinator, PTA President and Parents Parents Parents September 2018 – June 2019 September 2018 – June 2019 September 2018 – June 2019 September 2018 – June 2019 Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Assistant Principal Assistant Principal Parent Coordinator Assistant Principal If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. Millennium Development Girls for Gender Equity Urban Leadership Program Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Once all pedagogical staff is assigned, we will manage funds to cover OPTS including: 1. Purchase Skedula Online Grading and Assessment Program 2. Purchase Go Daddy Website 3. Purchase School Messenger Program 2018-19 SCEP-FL 34  Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA X PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. ● 2018 – 2019 School Survey and School Quality Snapshot ● Feedback at PTA Meetings, P/T Conferences and Workshops (Exit Slips, Parent Surveys) ● Feedback from Mid-Year Parent Survey Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Review School Survey and School Quality Snapshot Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 35  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) SWD Students ELL Students Students performing in the lowest third Pushable Level 2 & 3 Students Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) All SWD Students receive5 extra periods of instruction per week during the school day All SWD students receive5 extra periods of instruction per week during the school day All SWD students receive5 extra periods of instruction per week during the school day Differentiated Instruction based on Common Core Standards in all ELA Classes After school ELA Program SaturdayMid-Year ENL Academy Pre, Mid and Post Assessments Professional Learning Sessions All students receive differentiated instruction based on Common Core Standards in ELA classes as a whole group and small group instruction during class including the use of Achieve3000 All students receive differentiated instruction based on Common Core Standards in all ELA Classes as a whole group and small group instruction during the school day including the use of Achieve3000 After schoolELA Program utilizing small group and one-to-one tutoring targeting AIS students ELA Program utilizing small group and one-to-one tutoring targeting AIS students After school ENL Saturday Mid-yearAcademyutilizing small group and one-to-one tutoring targeting AIS students Use of ELA technology lab by students as a whole ENL Saturday Acadmeywill be offered on Saturdays from January - March Use of ELA technology lab by students as a whole group by ELA class during the school day using Achieve3000 2018-19 SCEP-FL 36  Mathematics SWD Students ELL Students Students performing in the lowest third Pushable Level 2 & 3 Students group by ELA class using Acheive 3000 Professional Learning Sessions attended by ELA teachers All SWD Students receive5 extra periods of instruction per week during the school day All students receive differentiated instruction based on Common Core Standards in Math classes as a whole group and small group instruction during class including the use of IReady& Waggle Math online learning After school Math Program utilizing small group and one-to-one tutoring targeting AIS students All SWD Students receive5 extra periods of instruction per week during the school day Differentiated Instruction based on Common Core Standards in all Math Classes After school Math Program SaturdayMid-Year ENL Academy Pre-assessment and Quarterly Assessments Professional Learning Sessions ENL Saturday Mid-yearAcademyutilizing small group and one-to-one tutoring targeting AIS students Use of Math technology lab by students as a whole group by Math class including the use of IReady& Waggle Math online learning Professional Learning Sessions attended by ELA teachers offered on Mondays after school All SWD Students receive5 extra periods of instruction per week during the school day All students receive differentiated instruction based on Common Core Standards in all Math Classes as a whole group and small group instruction during the school day including the use of IReady& Waggle Math online learning After school Math Program utilizing small group and one-to-one tutoring targeting AIS students After school ENL Saturday Academywill be offered on Saturdays from January - March Use of Math technology lab by students as a whole group by Math class during the school day including the use of IReady& Waggle Math online learning Professional Learning Sessions attended by 2018-19 SCEP-FL 37 Professional Learning Sessions attended by Math teachers Math teachers offered on Mondays after school Science SWD Students ELL Students Students performing in the lowest third Pushable Level 2 & 3 Students Social Studies SWD Students ELL Students Students performing in the lowest third Push able Level 2 & 3 Students Focus on content enrichment, analytical skills and laboratory analysis Differentiated Instruction based on Common Core Standards in all Science Classes Focus on DBQ’s, project based learning and service learning activities Differentiated Instruction based on Common Core Standards in all Social Studies Classes All students will focus on content enrichment, analytical skills and laboratory analysis during science class All students will receive Differentiated Instruction based on Common Core Standards in all Science Classes during science class as a whole group and small group instruction All students will Focus on DBQ’s, project based learning and service learning activities during social studies class All students will receive Differentiated Instruction based on Common Core Standards in their Social Studies Classes during instruction as a whole group and small group instruction All students will focus on content enrichment, analytical skills and laboratory analysis during science class during the school day All students will receive Differentiated Instruction based on Common Core Standards in all Science Classes during science class as a whole group and small group instruction during the school day All students will Focus on DBQ’s, project based learning and service learning activities during social studies class during the school day All students will receive Differentiated Instruction based on Common Core Standards in their Social Studies Classes during instruction as a whole group and small group instruction during the school day Guidance Counseling Mandated and At-Risk Counseling offered one-to-one At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, Students identified as Tier 2 & Tier 3 RTI students during Guidance Counseling Mandated and At-Risk Counseling Guidance Counseling Mandated and At-Risk Counseling 2018-19 SCEP-FL 38 School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) monthly grade RTI meetings SWD students classified ED Students with FBA/BIPS/Crisis Paras Holdovers Social Worker Mandated and At-Risk Counseling School Psychologist At-Risk Counseling Classroom presentations PBIS Incentive Programs Social Worker Family Counseling SAPIS Program offered one-to-one and in small group Social Worker Mandated and At-Risk Counseling offered one-to-one and in small group School Psychologist At-Risk Counseling one-to-one and small group Classroom presentations offered to the whole classes and in small group during the school day and after school Social Worker Mandated and At-Risk Counseling offered one-to-one and in small group during the school day and after school School Psychologist At-Risk Counseling one-to-one and small group during the school day School Wide PBIS Incentive Programs Social Worker Family Counseling Classroom presentations offered to the whole classes during the school day offered one-to-one, whole family SAPIS Program offered to whole classes, one-to-one, small group Whole School PBIS Incentive Programs “Manny Bucks” Social Worker Family Counseling offered one-to-one, whole family during the school day SAPIS Program offered to whole classes, one-to-one, small group During the school day and after school 2018-19 SCEP-FL 39  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 58 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. We will provide each student with a backpack that includes basic emergency school supplies for the school year. In addition, STH students who cannot afford field trips and school events will have the cost of those events covered by the school. STH students who are considered tier 2 RTI students will be provided at-risk counseling. STH students who are considered tier 3 student RTI students will be provided with a mentor for the year. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 40  N/A 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. N/A 2018-19 SCEP-FL 41  Section 8: Title I Program Information Directions:  All schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. To ensure all teachers are highly qualified the payroll secretary will review the certification and licensing of all teachers ensuring that all teachers have all degrees completed and are certified by the state in their subject area. Teachers are assigned based on the area that they are highly qualified to teach. In order to recruit teachers the Principal along with subject area Assistant Principals interview potential candidates on a rolling basis throughout the course of the year. The Principal along with department Assistant Principals attend recruit fairs in the summer in order to recruit highly qualified teachers. In addition, teachers receive direct support from the department Assistant Principals and lead teachers throughout the course of the year. Department Assistant Principals and lead teachers will provide subject area professional development throughout the course of the school year. Teachers will also attend professional development workshops offered by the department of education and the district ambassadors program throughout the course of the year. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the strategies and activities for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, staff, and paraprofessionals that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). Roy H. Mann – I.S. 78 Professional Learning Plan Through an analysis of our School Quality Snapshot, NYS Accountability Report, PPO Report, Instructional Focus, The Framework for Great Schools, Danielson’s Framework, Comprehensive Educational Plan, Teacher Observation 2018-19 SCEP-FL 42  Reports, Benchmark Assessments, individual student progress, and teacher surveys we have identified areas in need of improvement. In order to provide each teacher with the training necessary to provide engaging instruction that allows for multiple points of entry based on student data, we are offering a mixture of mandated professional learning sessions focusing on high need areas, monthly “menu” option professional learning seminars allowing teachers to receive in-depth train in identified areas of need. Teachers will be able to select a fall seminar and a spring seminar to attend. Teachers will also be given the opportunity to align curriculum, align assessments and grow together through monthly vertical planning sessions. Teachers will utilize the information from their professional goals to select from a “menu” of professional learning seminar opportunities that best support the teacher’s ability to reach his/her goals. Teachers will identify one instructional planning goal, one classroom environment goal and one instructional interaction goal based on the attached Danielson’s Framework for Teaching at the start of the year and meet with their subject area supervisor to discuss their professional goals for the year. As part of the summative conference, teachers will meet with their subject area supervisor to reflect on their progress towards meeting their goals. Over the course of the school year teachers will receive training in:  Claims & Counter Claims  Cognitive rigor  Assessment  Classroom management  Collaborative planning  College and career readiness  Danielson’s Framework  Data analysis  Differentiated instruction  Effective Questioning Formative Assessment   Portfolios  Online Enrichment Learning  Questioning   Use of Technology  Using Assessment to Drive Instruction Self & Peer Assessments Professional Learning Seminar “Menu” Designing Targeted Instruction 2018-19 SCEP-FL 43  Using the Depth of Knowledge Chart, Accountable Talking Stems, and Danielson’s Framework the facilitator will outline how to uses Formatve and Summative data to design targeted instruction that best meets the needs of their students Classroom Management Strategies The facilitators will outline the classroom management strategies that best engage students in learning They will use the Danielson Framework as a guide as well as their own teaching experience. Using Online Enrichment Learning to Drive Instruction The facilitator will outline effective use of online enrichment learning to individualize student instruction and better meet students at their levels. Presenters will outline the best teaching strategies using achieve3000, I-Ready Math.. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/information, early intervention services, etc.). N/A 2018-19 SCEP-FL 44  4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. ● Teachers participate in weekly Common Planning Time where they review student data and select appropriate assessment measures under the supervision of their subject area assistant principal ● Lead teachers from each department work with the cabinet to select the school wide assessments ● To support teachers we are providing semester long Professional Development seminars on Using Assessment to Drive Instruction, along with Using Formative Assessment to Drive instruction 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds enables, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (SCEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Title I Part A (Basic) Federal Title I School Improvement 1003(a) Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funds Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Federal Federal Federal Federal Federal 402,339.00 N/A 136,982.00 N/A 12,366.00 N/A X N/A X N/A N/A N/A Column B Section Reference(s) Section 5 - Part 3 (Action Plan) N/A Section 5- Part 3 (Action Plan) N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 SCEP-FL 45  Tax Levy (FSF) Local 3,789,241.00 X Section 5 - Part 3 (Action Plan) 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I School Improvement 1003(a): To support implementation of school improvement activities identified through the Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) reviews or a school review with district oversight and included in the DCIP/SCEP.  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: To support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs.  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in 2018-19 SCEP-FL 46  effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan.  Title I Priority and Focus School Parent Engagement Set-aside: Additional set-aside is to enable greater and  more meaningful parent participation in the education of their children. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.  Grant funds awarded via a competitive process, including Title I 1003(g) SIG funds: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 47  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent Involvement Policy (PIP) Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. Roy H. Mann, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students Roy H. Mann will support parents and families of Title I students by: 2018-19 SCEP-FL 48  ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; Parental Involvement and School Quality To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; 2018-19 SCEP-FL 49  ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) School-Parent Compact (SPC) [Roy H. Mann] , in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum 2018-19 SCEP-FL 50  I. School Responsibilities: s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; 2018-19 SCEP-FL 51  ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; Provide general support to parents by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities: II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; 2018-19 SCEP-FL 52  ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; III. Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 53  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): K 6 1 7 2 8 3 9 4 10 5 11 12 2018-19 SCEP-FL 54  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: Our instructional program is aimed at improving the ELA and NYSESLAT scores of our ELLs on NYS assessments. All ELLs as well as former ELLs will be eligible to participate. This after school program will take place on Thursdays from 2:25 to 4:25 p.m. Students will be instructed by a fully certified teacher of ENL. Attendance records, assessments and supplementary student portfolios are kept for each of our participating ELLs. Records, including student attendance, program notifications and parent consent forms in preferred languages are maintained and kept on file in our ELL Folder of Critical Documents. Former ELLs are also invited to participate. These documents are available for review in Mr. Puleo's office. This after school program will run from September through May for a total of 88 instructional hours. It will focus on Transitioning and Expanding level ELLs in grades 6-8 and former ELLs improving their performance on the NYS ELA exam. Students are instructed in English with native language support coming in the form of bilingual dictionaries and glossaries. The "Comprehensive Reading Assessment" series by Options Publishing as well as Continental's "New York ELLs" will be utilized in this program. These books are already on site and will not be paid for with Title III money. Additionally, an after school program will also take place on Wednesdays from 2:25-4:25.The rationale in opening a program on Wednesday afternoons is so that we may target Entering, Emerging level ELLs and newcomers for small group instruction. This year, 32 of our 44 ELLs are here for one year or less and would benefit greatly from such a program. It will run from September through May for 84 instructional hours. Again students will be instructed by a fully certified ESL teacher and this program will also be aimed at improving student performance on NYS assessments, including the ELA (for those whom are not exempt), Math and NYSESLAT exams. A Saturday program is also planned to run from February through March leading up to the NYS assessments. The program will take place from 8 A.M-12 P.M for 8 Saturdays or 32 instructional hours. ELLs as well as the parents of our ELLs will be encouraged to participate, especially those who have been unable to take part in our after school program. We will utilize the same series of books that are used for our after school program. Laptops which are already onsite will also be used and the ENL computer program ESL Reading Smart will be thoroughly explored to aid in the English language development of our students and their parents. Our ELLs are instructed in English by a fully certified ENL teacher with the support of our SETSS coordinator Ms. Sett. Instruction is in English and is aimed at improving each student’s ability in the 4 modalities of English language proficiency, including reading, writing, speaking and listening. Native language support is provided in the form of written texts, dictionaries and glossaries. Prior 2018-19 SCEP-FL 55  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information knowledge, past experiences and cultural backgrounds are incorporated into classroom activities. ELLs are immersed in a print rich environment where comprehension, participation and higher order thinking skills are emphasized through the use of a wide variety of teaching methods and tasks including graphic organizers, response groups, and writing workshops. ESL instruction is provided by a fully certified ESL teacher. On site materials used include a wide variety of books, manipulatives, flashcards, posters, videos, audio tapes, computer programs and games designed to improve English proficiency of our ELLs. Books titles include Continental's ''New York ELLs'', Pearson's ''Exploring English'' and "True Stories" series as well as Longman's ''Grammar Essentials'' and ''Longman Mathematics''. The already on site computer programs "Rosetta Stone" and “ESL Reading Smart” will also be utilized on Wednesdays to offer beginner level ELLs English language support and audio reading materials are used to provide added support to students as they master new literacy skills. Materials to be purchased for our Title III program include 20 copies of Longman's ''Fast track Phonics" for $24 each, as well as notebooks, folders, binders and pens. I.S 78 uses data to drive instruction. The NYSESLAT continues to be an integral tool used to assess the literacy skills of our ELLs. Based upon our AMAO tool, our school has continued to meet AMAO 1 (% of students making progress in English as per the NYSESLAT). We also rely upon ELL Periodic Assessments to help us gather data on the progress of our ELLs. Performance indicators reveal that the weakest modalities of our current ELLs' English Language development are reading and writing followed by listening then speaking. NYSESLAT data is reinforced by teacher observation and students' performance on the computer program Achieve 3000 as well as ELL Periodic Assessments. Teachers use this data to differentiate their instruction so as to better meet students' individualized needs. The ENL instuctor, content area teachers and school leadership including Principal Cusumano and Assistant Principal Diesa work together reviewing data provided by these assessments. School leadership collaborate with teachers to provide the framework for the instruction that is vital to ensure the adequate progress of our ELLs. Planning and various methods of assessment are based upon such data. Data from Achieve 3000 ESL Reading Smart and periodic assessments allow us to strategically deliver differentiated instruction and group our students accordingly. It further enables us to set both teacher and student goals that are monitored and adjusted regularly. Currently, 18 of our 44 ELLs are at the Entering or Emerging stage of English language proficiency. Data patterns across proficiency levels on the NYSITELL reveal that 9 of our 11 newcomers scored at the Entering level of English proficiency. Not surprisingly, the weakest modalities are reading and writing. Thus, instruction will be especially focused on addressing these critical areas. Instruction of ELLs is cognitively demanding but will be scaffolded so as to ensure student success. Learning will be organized into topics and themes so that students can build upon previous learning of vocabulary and grammatical structures as well as academic concepts and skills. Our students often work in groups, which affords them the opportunity to see other learners’ styles of problem solving while developing an appreciation for each person’s contribution to the group. Cooperative learning allows ELLs to work with advanced and native English speakers, which affords them the opportunity to hear and produce English and negotiate its meaning with others. Small group instruction creates a relaxed learning environment which encourages participation and inhibits any feelings of trepidation or anxiety. We also seek to maintain the continued enhancement of an appreciation of the cultural diversity existent in an ESL classroom. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 56  Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: "Alternate Forms of Assessment for ELLs'', ''Preparing ELLs for the ELA'' and ''Exploring the SIOP Model of Instructing ELLs". In addition, common planning time, which takes place every Tuesday afternoon from 2:20-3:00 pm, will also be utilized. These weekly sessions are ongoing throughout the entire school year. Due to the fact that we will be utilizing our extended time on Mondays and Tuesdays, we will not be using Title III money to fund these professional development blocks. Finally, when possible, content area teachers will also attend off site workshops specifically related to their areas of expertise so that they may better serve our ELLs. Records, including agendas, and attendance sheets are maintained in our ELL Folder of Critical Documents and available for review in the Principal's office. Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: Forging a strong partnership between school and home is vital to nurturing the academic and social growth of our students. Strong parental involvement is one factor that research has shown time and time again to have positive effects on academic achievement and the overall culture of the school. Parental involvement supports, encourages and provides opportunities for parents and educators to work together on behalf of our students. Maintaining this relationship is of utmost importance at I.S. 78. Parent needs are evaluated through formal and informal interviews and conferences. Language preference forms are sent home to determine what language the parent prefers to use when communicating both verbally and in the written form with our school. Translators are made available to ensure active participation and clear communication between the school and parents of our ELLs. Events celebrating the diverse cultural makeup of our school will be held during the school day throughout the year. Children are encouraged to contribute music, posters, food, flags, poems, and history celebrating their backgrounds and parent are invited to participate. ESL instructor Puleo, parent coordinator D'Aleo and school counselor Ms. Finnegan work together in the planning and implementation of parent activities and orientations. Letters informing parents of such events are sent home with students. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 57  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Translated versions are available so that information is sent in each student's home language. Follow-up phone calls are made to ensure notification and full parental engagement and participation. Parents and guardians of all of our current and former ELLs are invited to participate in such events. Topics and themes include multicultural celebrations, festivals, award ceremonies, periodic orientations and information nights where assessments, curriculum, promotional criteria, accommodations and learning strategies are thoroughly explored and discussed. These workshops will run from 2:30-4:00 pm and are tentatively scheduled to take place on the following dates: Sept. 26th, Nov. 14th, Jan. 23rd, Mar. 20th and May 22nd. On site adult ESL books including bilingual picture dictionaries and phonics workbooks will be offered to the parents of our ELLs so that they may improve their own language proficiency. Parents are also invited to attend our Saturday program with their children. The program will run from February through March for a total of 8 Saturdays. It will take place from 8 A.M to 12 and will be serviced by Assistant Principal Diesa, ENL coordinator Puleo, and SETSS coordinator Sett. The ENL reading program “ESL Reading Smart” will be utilized to improve all four modalities of English proficiency for both our ELLs and their parents in a truly unique learning opportunity for our families. Off- site adult ESL programs will be recommended upon request. Visuals and literature will be provided in a myriad of languages at all events and meetings so as to ensure understanding and full participation .Additionally, orientations and communications with parents are ongoing throughout the school year. Due to the fact that we will be utilizing the school day, our extended time on Tuesday afternoons and parent-teacher conferences, we will not be using Title III money to fund these events. Records, including translated agendas, invitations and attendance sheets are maintained by Mr. Puleo and are available for review in his office Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits) N/A  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, N/A N/A Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 SCEP-FL 58  Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 SCEP-FL 59  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 22 School Name Roy H. Mann Borough Brooklyn School Number 078 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Anthony Cusumano Coach type here ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Stephen Puleo Teacher/Subject Area Ian Dougherty / Special Ed Teacher/Subject Area Kim Gottesman/ ELA Related-Service Provider Bobby Galvin Superintendent Julia Bove Assistant Principal Michael Diesa Coach type here School Counselor Kristen Finegan Parent Keshia Beckford Parent Coordinator Dorothy D'Aleo Field Support Center Staff Member type here Other (Name and Title) Andrea Sett/ Special Ed C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 0 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 1 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 1 1 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 2018-19 SCEP-FL 60  D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 650 Total number of ELLs 47 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 7.23% Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 1 2 4 3 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? The NYSESLAT continues to be an integral tool used to assess the literacy skills of our ELLs.We also rely on ELL Periodic Assessments as well as the more general ELA Periodic Assessments to help us gather data on the progress of our ELLs.The computer programs Achieve 3000 and ESL Reading Smart are also used to assess the early literacy skills of our ELLs. Interm Assessment (ITA) Exams align with curriculum and predictive exams are aligned with and mirror the state ELA exam. Data reports and assessment reports are generated by class after each use of the program. Item skill analysis reports for class and individual students are also available. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 61  2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? I.S 78 has a team in place to review, analyze and disseminate data from Achieve3000, I-Ready Math, the Item Skills Analysis and the NYSESLAT exam to the entire staff so that lessons can be tailored to each student's individualized needs. This team consists of Principal Cusumano, Assistant Principals Diesa and Nicoletta, Parent Coordinator D'Aleo, Spec. Ed Coordinator Sett and ENL Instructor Puleo. Professional development sessions are provided to all teachers so that this data may be used to drive instruction on a daily basis. All students receive two periods of either Acheive3000 or ESL Reading Smart as part of their program. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? Each programs success will be based upon its effectiveness in helping our ELLs improve their English proficiency and achievement levels, both in the classroom and on standardized exams. The data allows teachers to provide targeted instruction to their students which leads student performance gains . The gains are measured by data gathered from student performance on Achieve 3000, ESL Reading Smart, state exams, periodic assessments and the NYSESLAT. Continued improvement is expected with the implementation of current programs and interventions. All students receive Fall, Mid and End Year Assessments through Achieve3000 or ESL Reading Smart. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? Monthly RTI Meetings Three Tier RTI Plan Afterschool ENL Support Program 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] Paste response to question here: 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? Every September each teacher is provided with an information packet containing data on each ELL including the latest NYSESLAT results, scores on state exams, home language , years of service,and student's strengths both academic and social as well as areas in need of improvement. Professional development sessions are provided on a monthly basis to all teachers so that this information may be used to tailor lessons, drive instruction, further meet each child's individualized needs and to make the required adjustments to our programs. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 62  I.S 78 follows a 42 minute, 8 period a day schedule. There is a 10 minute A.M advisory period. I.S 78 offers a freestanding ENL program consisting of - English Language Learners. The students are heterogeneously mixed in their classes and instruction is provided by a fully certified ENL instructor. Students in contiguous grades are grouped together-6th and 7th graders/ 7th and 8th graders.This helps to further ensure that students are being instructed using both grade and age appropriate materials. b. TBE program. If applicable. Paste response to questions here: c. DL program. If applicable. Paste response to questions here: 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? Student schedules, home languages, proficiency levels, test results and accommodations are provided to all staff members.Beginner/Entering level ELLs receive 360 total minutes of ENL per week-180 minutes of standalone ENL and 180 minutes of integrated ENL/ELA. Low Intermediate/Emerging level ELLs also receive 360 minutes of ENL per week-90 minutes of standalone ENL, and 180 minutes of integrated ENL /ELA with the flexibility of 90 minutes in any content area.Intermediate/Transitioning level ELLs are entitled to 180 minutes of ENL per week-90 minutes of Integrated ENL/ELA and 90 minutes of flexible integrated ENL in any content area. Advanced /Expanding level ELLs receive 180 minutes of Integrated ENL/ ELA per week Finally, those deemed Proficient/Commanding based upon their NYSESLAT scores are still entitled to receive ENL services.These ELLs receive 90 minutes of Integrated ENL /ELA per week and they will also receive continued support for two years in the form of testing accommodations and will also be invited to take part in our Title III after school program.Bilingual libraries and translated modes of communication will also continue to be made available to these students.ENL Instructor Puleo works closely with the staff and programmer Epstein to ensure that each and every ELL receives mandated services as per CR Part 154. Group sizes range from 5 to 18 ELLs per class instructed by one fully certified ENL teacher. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. As a means of providing our ELLs with access to academic content areas and to meet the demands and rigors of the Common Core, teachers use a myriad of ENL strategies including scaffolding, use of graphic organizers, visuals, glossaries and laptops for reading and writing .ENL Instructor Puleo works closely with content area teachers in planning lessons and promoting best practices.Materials and supplies are shared amongst teachers of ELLs.Professional Development is also made available to these teachers with topics including lesson planning, differentiating, and alternate forms of assessment.Content area books intended especially for our ELLs are also utilized. These include the Longman ENL Editions of math, science and social studies texts.As previously noted , instruction of ELLs will be cognitively demanding but will be scaffolded so as to ensure student success.Learning is organized into themes and topics so that students can build upon previous learning of vocabulary and grammatical structures as well as academic concepts and skills. All instruction takes place in English but is supplemented by use of bilingual libraries and computer programs.As always I.S 78 provides our ELLs with a relaxed and nurturing learning environment with small group settings where instruction is individualized and risk taking and participation are encouraged. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? To ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their native language , the Spanish LAB is administered to determine dominant language of those students whose HLS indicate the need to do so. I.S 78 also provides translators, bilingual glossaries and translated versions of the state math and science exams so that students will have the benefit of their native language on these tests. Translators include but are not limited to Ms. Michel and Mr Conde. Additional translators may also be hired for lower incidence languages. ELLs are also assessed throughout the entire school year using their native languages. Activities and 2018-19 SCEP-FL 63  modes of assessment include having our ELLs read books and articles in their native language and answer questions and provide feedback in English. They will also engage in conversations with their peers and teachers in NL, while giving opinions and providing written responses in English. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status Instruction is differentiated for each ELL subgroup.Modes of differentiation include tiered assignments, use of different modalities, use of visual and listening aides, as well as a wide variety of texts aimed at benefiting beginner, intermediate and advanced ELLs alike.Students identified as SIFE receive the additional support they need so that they can perform at grade level.In order to facilitate and fully enable our students who have interrupted formal education (SIFE), we seek to build supportive environments that respond to the immediate social, cultural and linguistic needs of our ELLs with limited schooling.. Newcomer centers and the buddy system are implemented to ease their transition. Collaboration takes place across all academic departments and content areas to support simultaneous linguistic and academic development that is age and grade appropriate.Sheltered instruction is also used. This is English language instruction that is modified so that subject matter is more comprehensible to students with limited vocabularies. The SIOP model also uses visuals and technology to help these students gain proficiency. Additionally SIFE students are provided with AIS which includes Rosetta Stone, Reading Smart, one to one tutoring and small group instruction. Newcomers are also provided with instruction aimed at developing their reading , writing, listening and speaking skills.They work together and with more advanced level ELLs in a small group setting that utilizes a myriad of instructional materials. These materials include a variety of books, manipulatives, flash cards, posters, videos,audio tapes and games designed to improve their English proficiency.Students also benefit from using the computer programs Rosetta Stone and Reading Smart to enhance their development.Book titles include the "True Stories" series and "Grammar Essentials" by Longman. Although all instruction is English, students may use their native language to help each other and to negotiate meanings of words, phrases and/or concepts.Student libraries include books in their native language as well. Letters sent home to parents are available in a variety of languages so as to keep them informed and fully involved in their child's education.Beginners are explicitly instructed in an age appropriate manner in the 5 components of reading-phonemic awareness, phonics, fluency,vocabulary, and comprehension. Students have access to a literacy rich environment and print materials.They are also encouraged to attend our morning tutorial as well as our after school Title III program. As always our students are taught in a small group and non-threatening environment that encourages participation and risk taking and aims to alleviate feelings of anxiety and trepidation. ELLs receiving services for 4 to 6 years are exposed to Sheltered Instruction as an approach for teaching content to ELLs in strategic ways that make the subject matter concepts comprehensible while promoting the students, English language development.Content is made comprehensible through techniques such as the use of visual aides, modeling, demonstrations, graphic organizers, vocabulary previews,adaptive texts, cooperative learning, peer tutoring, native language support and the use of technology. These students are also using the Reading Smart computer program and are always encouraged to participate in our Title III after school program as well as our ELA and Math programs. Long term ELLs are provided with a high level of instruction aimed at getting them proficient in each of the four modalities of the English language-reading,writing,speaking and listening. The ENL teacher works diligently with the content area teachers so that instruction is aligned , and will therefore better prepare our students to succeed in all academic areas. Long term ELLs benefit from taking part in our Reading Smart computer program as well as Achieve 3000. Data reports including individual item skill analysis are used to assess students and guide instruction.These students are also encouraged to join our after school ENL program.They are also encouraged to take part in our after school ELA and Math programs. Students in need of additional or alternative services such as Special Education are referred to th School Assessment Team for further evaluation. We currently do not have Special Education students mandated for bilingual services, however if as student is mandated for bilingual services we will provide a bilingual alternate placement paraprofessional and the student will receive 2018-19 SCEP-FL 64  mandated ENL services as per CR Part 154. Those deemed proficient based upon their NYSESLAT scores are no longer entitled to receive ENL services, however they will receive continued support for two years in the form of testing modifications and will also be invited to continue to take part in our after school Title III Program. Bilingual libraries and translated modes of communication will continue to be made available to these students. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? ELL-SWDs are exposed to wide variety of instructional strategies and grade level materials that provide access to academic content areas while improving their English proficiency.Sheltered Instruction is an approach for teaching content to ELLs in ways that make the subject matter comprehensible while promoting the students' English language development.There is a high level of student engagement and interaction with the teacher, with other students and with the text which leads to elaborated discourse and thinking. Students are taught functional language skills as well as how to negotiate meaning, argue, persuade, disagree and how to ask for clarification.ELL-SWDs are taught in a non-threatening environment where students feel comfortable taking risks with language.Lesson are supplemented with a myriad of materials that are both age and grade appropriate including related texts, graphs, models, audio-visuals and computer based resources. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? I.S 78 uses curricular, instructional and scheduling flexibility to meet the diverse needs of ELL-SWDs. ENL Instructor Puleo is an active part of an IEP team working with special education teachers Sett and Dougherty to create attainable goals and effective instructional strategies to properly meet the needs of our ELL-SWDs. Teachers and programmer Epstein work together to create scheduling flexibility that allows us to provide the services that meet the critical needs of our ELL-SWDs. I.S 78 also offers flexible programming so that our ELL-SWDs receive their mandated ENL instruction as well as th maximum exposure possible to a general education setting. Flexible scheduling benefits both students and teachers alike. Blocks of time can enhance teaming by providing time for teachers to plan together during common planning time and to develop various learning activities. With blocks of time to facilitate involvement, students benefit from less fragmentation and more engagement in project based learning and interdisciplinary activities, promoting skill application,interpersonal relations and decision making skills related to concrete, relevant problems.This leads to increased student engagement and positive social ramifications. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. ENL instruction is aligned with the Common Core. In Math, students are taught by fully certified content area math teachers well versed in ENL methodologies during double period blocks of Math. Our ELLs will use the Connected Mathematics series (CMP3).Lap tops , books and manipulatives have been purchased to aid in our ELLs' development of the English language. Computer programs including Rosetta Stone and Reading Smart are utilized and websites including Better- English and ESL Cafe, are explored to supplement and enhance lessons. Targeted interventions for all ELLs including newcomers, SIFE and long term ELLs include the previously mentioned computer programs Achieve 3000 and ESL Reading Smart. All of our ELLs are invited to take part in our after school Title III program.ELLs who have scored proficient on the NYSESLAT are still entitled to testing modifications for 2 years and are also invited to continue their enrollment in our after school ENL program as well as to make use of the bilingual libraries made available to them.Translated means of communication are also continued to be made for these students. Instructional strategies for all of our ELLs include but are not limited to: Activating and building prior knowledge,using language for meaningful and authentic purposes, using illustrations and demonstrations, using TPR (total physical response), using read-alouds, using native languages, computer assisted research, scaffolding,and using critical self and peer reflection. Finally, we 2018-19 SCEP-FL 65  seek to establish risk free learning environments that encourage participation and nurture a respect and appreciation for diversity. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? New programs that have been implemented this year include the computer programs Rosetta Stone and Reading Smart. These programs have been shown to be an effective tool in learning a new language and will help our ELLs improve in each of the 4 modalities of language development including read, writing, listening and speaking.Newcomers will be able to utilize this software while in their general ed and content area classes as well as at home. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? I.S 78 did not have a bilingual program during the 2016-17 school year. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. Our ELLs are invited to take part in all of the programs offered to our entire student body. They also attend a 37 minutes period of instruction prior to the start of the regular school day. Additionally, our ELLs are encouraged to join our after school Title III program. Students also participate in interim assessments and ELL assessments that are monitored, analyzed and disseminated on a regular basis. Enrichment clubs and activities are open to all of our ELLs during and after school. These enrichment opportunities include yearbook, band, cheerleading,photography, archery, basketball, soccer, flag football and culinary arts. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. I.S 78 utilizes a myriad of instructional materials to support our ELL population. These materials include a wide variety of books, manipulatives, flash cards, posters, videos, audio tapes and games designed to improve English language proficiency.Book titles include the 'Picture This' and 'Exploring English' series from Longman as well as the 'Empire State NYSESLAT series from Continental Press. ELLs also have access to an extensive bilingual library of books within their ENL classroom as well as in the school library.They are given access to picture dictionaries as well, which are available in a multitude of languages. Laptops and headphones are also used along with interactive computer software including Rosetta Stone, Reading Smart and Achieve 3000. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? All of our ELLs receive native language support. Students receive native language glossaries and dictionaries for content area vocabulary. Classroom libraries are supplemented with reading material in native languages. Materials are age and grade appropriate across genres. In addition, students use laptops and interactive response technology for immediate assessment of understanding. Native speaker paraprofessionals, peer to peer instruction, native language literature as well as computer assistance in native language is also used to support our ELLs. We also use the computer program Rosetta Stone to supplement native language support.All of our ELLs are also provided with bilingual glossaries to use in their math classes so that they may better comprehend the necessary academic vocabulary. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. I.S 78 utilizes services and resources that are both age and grade appropriate . These include a wide array of high interest materials that are tiered so as to accommodate the varying needs of all of our English Language Learners.Additionally, we use a variety of books and other reading material with lower level vocabulary and high interest topics that correspond to the students' ages and grade levels.In doing so, we are able to meet the academic and linguistic needs of our ELLs while honoring their ages and interests so that instruction is both meaningful and appropriate. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? 2018-19 SCEP-FL 66  Given the fact that we are co-located with a charter elementary school , there is not a need to share resources as I.S 78 utilizes only resources that are both age and grade appropriate for our ELLs. Principal Cusumano and A.P Diesa meet with the heads of our co-locating charter school on a regular basis so that our students are ensured equal access to all of the resources and facilities that our campus has to offer. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). All of our students and parents know which class their children have been assigned to prior to the first day of school.A special orientation and barbecue are held for parents and students entering the 6th grade.They are given an opportunity to tour the building, meet with staff and have their questions and concerns addressed. Our guidance counselors, parent coordinator and administration are available prior to the first day of school to meet with students and parents if needed.Newly enrolled ELLs are paired with students who speak the same language so as to make for a smoother transition.Bilingual libraries are also made available to these students as well as translated modes of communication to their homes.Through these initiatives we hope to alleviate any tension or anxiety that our ELLs may be experiencing.Additionally,several parent conferences and orientations are arranged throughout the school year so that parents can tour the school, meet teachers, see student work and progress first hand, as well as obtain a better understanding of the school's expectations and standards. Translators will be on hand to further meet the needs of parents and ELLs alike. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? The language elective offered to our entire student body is Spanish. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? Paste response to question here: Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? I.S 78's ENL instructor has received training through West Ed, QTEL and SIOP. Meaningful professional development will be passed on to all teachers by our licensed ENL instructor. Instruction will include methods aimed to better equip teachers to help our ELLs succeed. Professional development blocks will be used to pass on ENL teaching strategies, identification procedures and testing modifications. Model lessons, common planning, and alternate assessment methods will also be thoroughly explored. Trips will be scheduled to provide alternate settings for our ELL students to further develop their language skills learned in the classroom and enrich their curriculum and cultural experiences. Professional development will be provided on a monthly basis throughout the duration of the school year so that all teachers will be better equipped to meet the needs of our ELLs. Teachers will collaborate and work together to create and implement an effective instructional, monitoring and assessment system for our ELLs. Professional development sessions will begin in October and further dates will be tentatively scheduled for professional days, including Election Day and Brooklyn-Queens Day. Common preps will also be utilized for training and planning. The ENL instructor will take part in multiple workshops throughout the year where new strategies will be explored. Topics will include developing literacy in ELLs, academic/content area development, and alternate 2018-19 SCEP-FL 67  forms of assessment and evaluation. All content area, special education, and common branch teachers will be invited to attend these workshops. All new general education teachers will receive their mandated 7.5 hrs of professional development. Special education teachers will receive 10 hours of training in ELL teaching strategies. Surveys are distributed to help determine the needs of those teachers in need of such support. All of the aforementioned activities will support the minimum 7.5 hours of ELL training for new staff members. Records are maintained and are available for review in our ENL files. Our ENL Instructor Puleo and a literacy teacher will also receive additional training through the network. Counselors are trained by the ENL instructor and through the Network in how to properly accommodate newcomers and their families. This includes everything from the initial meeting, completion of the HLS, parent orientations and helping ELLs complete their high school applications so as to ensure a smooth transition.All teachers receive training in the use of Skedula which leads to the formation of goals for individual students. Assistant Principals, paraprofessionals, guidance counselors, psychologists, occupational and speech therapists, secretaries and parent coordinator are well versed in the screening process of ELLs and will receive the continued support that they require. The before mentioned staff also take part in a number of off site professional development opportunities throughout the year. Support is provided to staff to assist ELLs as they transition from school level to another. Grade and age appropriate materials are available to all staff members. These include texts, visual aids, graphic organizers, adapted texts and the use of technology such as computer programs. Lesson planning and best teaching practices are also explored. Meaningful professional development is provided to all teachers of ELLs. Titles include but are not limited to the following : -Utilizing Common Core Unit Plans -Effective Planning -Using Formative Assessment to Drive Instruction -The Socratic Method -Supporting ELLs Across Content Areas -Effective Questioning -Instruction to Meet All Student Needs -Creating Student Pathways to College 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. Staff members receive support so that they may fully assist our ELLs as they transition from elementary to middle/or middle to high school.Support in the form of ENL teaching strategies, methodologies,alternate forms of assessment are thoroughly explored.Teachers are also made aware of the many factors that go into second language acquisition including self esteem and creating nurturing learning environments that encourage risk taking and participation.In doing so, we hope to make for a seamless and smooth transition as our ELLs move forward on their educational paths. Professional development is provided to all teachers and administrators that specifically address the needs of our ELLs. The ENL teacher led a PD for the staff in September and holds monthly ENL seminars for General Education teachers during Monday PD time. A minimum of 15% of the required PD hours is dedicated to language acquisition, including co-teaching strategies and integrating language and content instruction for ELLs. ENL teachers will receive a minimum of 50% of their PD hours dedicated to language acquisition in alignment with content area instruction, including co-teaching strategies and integrating language and content instruction for ELLs. Agendas and attendance records are kept on file in Principal Cusumano's office. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 68  Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? Forging a strong partnership between school and home is vital to nurturing the academic and social growth of our students. Strong parental involvement is one factor that research has shown time and time again to have positive effects on academic achievement and the overall culture of a school. Parental involvement supports, encourages and provides opportunities for parents and educators to work together on behalf of our students. Maintaining such a relationship is of utmost importance at I.S. 78. An explicit open door policy is established so that parents always know they are welcome. Written information about classroom assignments, goals, assessments and school events and notices will be translated and parents will be encouraged to reply. Annual individual meetings are held throughout the year so that parents can tour the school, meet teachers, see student work and progress first hand, as well as obtain a better understanding of the school’s expectations and standards. The parent coordinator and translators will be available at these conferences to answer questions and provide further information regarding school matters. Visuals and literature will be provided in a myriad of languages at these meetings so as to ensure understanding.Copies of attendance records are kept by ENL Instructor Puleo in the ENL Folder of Critical Documents. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. *2-ENL Instructor Puleo keeps records of annual individual meetings with ELL parents as well as outreach via phone calls and letters. Parents are asked to sign attendance forms which are kept in our ELL Folder of Critical Documents and are available for review in Mr. Puleo's office. *3- Parents of our ELLs are encouraged to become active participating members of our school community. As such , it is imperative that we keep them up to date of the various workshops and events taking place every month. Notices are available in a variety of languages and translators are on hand so that a possible language barrier does not deter any parents from taking part in any gatherings and activities that are being offered.Formal events taking place include monthly PTA meetings, Anti-Bullying Workshops, HIgh School Information Nights,Common Core Math and ELA Workshops, Common Sense Media Workshops,College and Career Readiness Workshops as well as a Family Fun Night. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Paste response here: 2018-19 SCEP-FL 69 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Anthony Cusumano, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 70  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: Roy H. Mann School DBN: 22KO78 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Anthony Cusumano Title Principal Michael Diesa Assistant Principal Dorothy D'Aleo Parent Coordinator Stephen Puleo ENL/Bilingual Teacher Keisha Beckford Parent Kim Gottesman/ELA Teacher/Subject Area Ian Dougherty/ Special Ed Teacher/Subject Area n.a n.a Coach Coach Kristen Finnegan School Counselor Julia Bove n.a Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member n.a Andrea Sett Other Spec Ed Bobby Galvin Other Related Service N.A Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 10.30.17 10.30.17 10.30.17 10.30.17 10.30.17 10.30.17 10.30.17 n.a n.a 10.30.17 10.30.17 n.a 10.30.17 10.30.17 n.a 2018-19 SCEP-FL 71  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 22K078 School Name: I.S 78 Superintendent: Julia Bove The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this D'Aleo Parent Coordinator YES YES conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Dorothy n.a. * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. We assess the languages that parents speak and also those requesting translations using data that is collected and put into ATS upon registration of each child. We share these findings with our school community: the school leadership team, our school leaders including administrators, lead teachers, our PTA and our local community based organization during our opening fall leadership meetings and we update during our midyear assessment meetings and as needed throughout the entirety of the school year. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 72  When a child is admitted to the school, the parent is interviewed by the Guidance Counselor and/or our ENL Instructor and also fills out the Home Language Survey. At that time the parent is asked if they wish any school documents to be sent home in a language other than English. If so, their request is given to the ENL Coordinator who is responsible for ensuring that the parent receives information given in the translated version.Emergency contact cards are maintained for each child and are kept in the main office for review. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral 50% 25% 25% The overwhelming majority of our parents opt for oral and written communication to be in English. However we do serve students whose parents wish to communicate in the following languages:English,Haitian-Creole, French,Spanish, Russian,Ukrainian Arabic,Bengali and Urdu. The overwhelming majority of our parents opt for oral and written communication to be in English. However we do serve students whose parents wish to communicate in the following languages:English,Haitian-Creole, French,Spanish, Russian,Ukrainian Arabic,Bengali and Urdu. n.a Arabic Bengali Chinese Any Cantonese Croation French Haitian Chreole n.a N.A 16 2 1 0 1 8 na 2.81 na 16 .35 .18 0 .18 1.4 2 0 1 2 7 na 2.81 .35 0 .18 .35 1.23 2018-19 SCEP-FL 73  English Punjabi Russian Spanish Urdu Ukrainian N.A 29 466 1 3 30 12 1 N.A 5.09 81.75 .18 .53 5.26 2.11 .18 31 463 1 4 26 16 1 5.44 81.23 .18 .7 4.56 2.81 .18 N.A N.A N.A 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. N.A Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 74  Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families Parent Handbooks are distributed September 2018 . September 2018 Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. We will ensure parents have access to their language either through written translation, In house interpreters, google translator. If all of these methods fail we will use translator services by phone. Calendars which include important test dates and other notifications are disseminated on a monthly basis, as are notifications of our PTA meetings. progress reports are distributed every three months and voice mails are sent out periodically throughout the school year through School Messenger with translations available upon request. N.A First School Day of Every Month We will provide translated copies. Four weeks into every marking period. We will provide translated copies. N.A N.A 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to I.S 78 maintains steady contact with parents throughout the school year through both formal and informal interactions.These include but are not limited to the following: September 2017 provide interpretation service(s)? Through the DOE call in interpretation service Sept:Parent/ Teacher Conferences, 6 TH Grade Welcome Breakfast, ELL Orientation Oct:Open House, Middle Schools Fair, H.S Application Seminar Nov:H.S Night, Open School Dec:Holiday Concert, Anti-Bullying Workshop, ELL Orientation Jan:Schedula Workshop Feb:Common core ELA Workshop 2018-19 SCEP-FL 75  Mar: Common core Math Workshop, College and Career Readiness Workshop, Open School Apr:Common Sense Media Workshop, ELL Orientation May:Drama Performance,Arista Archon,Science Fair, Open School June:6th,7th,8th Grade Award Ceremonies,CDEC,Legislative breakfast Periodic calls are made to parents by teachers, administrators and guidance counselors throughout the school year and meetings are scheduled for Tuesday afternoons as well. N.A N.A N.A N.A N.A N.A N.A N.A N.A 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. In the event of an emergency parents will by contacted in their home language via school messenger. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. We will provide ENL documents on every student to teachers which include Regulation A-663 and information on every ENL student in the building. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents 2018-19 SCEP-FL 76   Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) The Parent Bill of Rights will be provided to all parents on Open School Day and Evening. A translation sign is posted in the main lobby in a conspicuous location. The School Safety Plan contains procedures for ensuring that all parents in need of language assisted services are not prevented from reaching the school’s administrative offices solely due to language barriers. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? Surveys will be distributed so that we may gather feedback on the quality and availability of services being offered to parents. We will carefully review the results of these surveys to gather information about best practices and make the appropriate changes so that we may fully meet the needs of all of our parents.Informal discussions with parents also take place throughout the school year and will also factor into decisions that are being made concerning quality control. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 77 
