2018-19 COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (CEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 17K091 School Name: P.S. 091 THE ALBANY AVENUE SCHOOL Principal: TESSA ALLEYNE 2018-19 CEP 1  Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 CEP 2  School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information The Albany Avenue School 17K091 School Number (DBN): Pre-K - 5 532 Albany Avenue, Brooklyn NY 12203 718-756-0243 Phone Number: 718-221-1316 Fax: Tessa Alleyne Talleyn2@schools.nyc.gov Email Address: School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Tessa Alleyne Veronica Antoine Charmaine Skeen Janice Mack CharmaineSkeen N/A N/A District Information Geographical District: 17 Mr. Clarence Ellis Superintendent: 1224 Park Place, Brooklyn, NY11213 Superintendent’s Office Address: CEllis@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: (718)221-4372 Phone Number: 718)221-4326 Fax: Brooklyn South Field Support Center (FSC) M. DeGovia FSC: Executive Director: 2018-19 CEP 3  Executive Director’s Office Address: 415 89 St. Brooklyn. NY 11209 Mdegovia@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 718-759-4913 Phone Number: 718-630-1634 Fax: 2018-19 CEP 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Tessa Alleyne Veronica Antoine CharmaineSkeen Virginia Carrington CharmaineSkeen N/A N/A Janice Mack StephanieFulson Patricia Pyle-Clarke *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable/ UFT- SLTChairperson UFTParaprofessional Representative UFT 2018-19 CEP 5  Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) JamilyahJob LynetteSmalls AudreyHeron Doreen Massiah Parent/PTA Parent Parent/PTA Parent/PTA Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ 2018-19 CEP 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with 2018-19 CEP 7  the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement 2018-19 CEP 8  Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? The mission of Public School 91 is to provide excellence in education by setting goals and high expectations for all in a safe and orderly environment so that our students can excel and reach their highest potential. This mission will empower them to utilize world resources as they contribute to and compete in a global community. 2018-19 CEP 9  2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. P.S. 91 - The Albany Avenue School has served as a beacon for children in Flatbush/Crown Heights, Brooklyn since farms once dotted the landscape. Our society has progressed from agrarian to industrial with increased reliance on technology and added demands for the acquisition of increasingly complex information. P.S. 91 has also evolved to prepare its students to embrace the challenges of complex academic and work environments of the 21st century. Students are provided with tailored learning experiences and innovation skills equipping them with critical thinking and the communication/ collaboration skills vital for success and achievement. Additionally, instructional practices and school’s curriculum all reflect shifts implemented in response to the increased diversity and cultural changes in our community. The school, built in 1904, now includes two buildings which consist of the main building with four floors, a basement, and sub-basement. On the fourth floor is the location for CAMBA, the afterschool program which serves 150 children in grades K-5 during the school year, in the summer and most school holidays. On the third floor, there is a school library media center and the school’s gymnasium. Two computer labs along with the science lab are on the second floor. The school’s auditorium seats our enthusiastic audiences for graduations, assemblies, and performances and parent meetings. The mini-building is located across the schoolyard and is currently the location for Achievement First Voyager Elementary School. Currently, this Pre-K-5 school serves a population of approximately 265 students – 93% are Black and 7% are Hispanic. The community is home to many immigrants from the Caribbean. The majority of the students come from low-income families as 86% of our students receive free or reduced-priced lunch. This year our school has two (2) Pre-Kindergarten classes. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. Ten percent (10%) of our students are English Language Learners, and 25% of the student body have Individualized Educational Plans. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. According to our School Quality Guide our school is approaching standards in the following areas: Student Progress, Student Achievement, and School Environment. Our school is meeting the target for closing the achievement gap. According to the State Accountability, our school is classified as a school in Good Standing. For areas of celebration, our school’s strengths are aligning the use of resources to support instructional goals that meet students’ needs. The school also put structures in place to foster a positive learning environment, inclusive culture and student success. Teacher teams engage in collaborative practices using the inquiry approach to improve classroom practice. Some challenges our school will address this year are to focus on curricula-aligned assessment practices that inform instruction, the use of research based effective instruction that yields high quality student work and to provide rigorous, engaging and coherent curricula aligned to the common core learning standards. In the Quality Review Report for 2017-2018, our school was proficient in the two categories of School Culture and Instruction Core. The 2018-19 CEP 10  Area of Focus is 1.2 Pedagogy. The impact, "There is an uneven engagement in challenging tasks and discussions do not always reflect high levels of thinking and participation." To become a proficient school, we will: Develop and monitor formative and summative assessments to ensure alignment between curriculum and assessment to allow teachers to provide targeted feedback to students and enable teachers to address student areas for improvement Provide professional development for analyzing individual and group data that supports instruction and provides actionable feedback so that students take ownership of their learning; expand the use of self-assessment protocols for students to reflect upon and evaluate their own understanding. Proactively develop a plan to make sure that all students are well known by a staff member, collect, monitor and share data on how the community stakeholders strategically support the social and emotional development of students. Further develop a focused plan for student achievement built upon high expectations for all students and ensure that this message is promoted in student, staff and parent communications. Provide professional development for staff and parents on how to build school-family partnerships around high expectations for student achievement. 2018-19 CEP 11  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 17K091 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration PK,0K,01,02,03,04,05,SE Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 260 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 42 44 13 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 33 30 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 95.0% % Attendance Rate 90.0% % Reduced Lunch 9.6% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 1.5% 11.5% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 1.9% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 8.25 0% 4% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 48.7% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 83% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A N/A N/A NO YES Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A NO NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A YES High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 26 24 91.2% 3.1% 23.5% 83.1% 1.2% 2.3% 2 0% 6.7 37.4% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No YES N/A N/A N/A NO YES N/A N/A N/A NO YES N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 CEP 12  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. . School Instructional Report 2018 An analysis of this report shows that students in all grades are struggling in writing from different sources. For all grades 3- 5 students, the lowest points scored on the NYS ELA Examination was in the area of constructive response in writing. Grade 3 scored 49%, which was a ten point increase from last year it was 6 points below the city's average of 55%. Grade 4 scored 62 % which was 4 points above the city average of 52%. Grade 67% an increased of 13 points in the area of writing and 2 point above the city's average of 65%. In reviewing the MOSL assessments, the students in grades K-2 are struggling with writing especially in writing sentences to convey a complete thought. School quality Guide 2016 -2017 In ELA, 33% met State Standards on the State English test; the average score was 2.6 out of 4.5. In Math, 29% met State Standards on the State Math test; the average score was 2.5 out of 4.5. Framework for Great Schools Report 2016- 2017 The school rated "Good" in the following areas: Rigorous Instruction, Collaborative Teachers, Supportive Environment, Effective School Leadership and Student Achievement. The school rated in two areas "Fair " in Strong Family-Community Ties and Trust. New York State Report Card 2017- 2018 2018-19 CEP 13  Our school had 30% of students proficient in Math in 2017. In 2018, 37% of students tested were Proficient in Math. This is an increase of 7%. In ELA, 34% of the students tested were proficient in ELA in 2017. In 2018, 49% of students tested were Proficient in ELA. This is an increase of 15%. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June, 2019 Grades K-5 teacher teams will collaboratively develop rigorous Common Core aligned units of study in writing across genres within the content areas to improve rigorous instruction as measured by the 5% increase of students scoring proficient in the ELA and MOSL assessments. 2018-19 CEP 14 Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All teachers Sept Coaches and school leaders 2018-2019 Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). In June 2018, teachers met in grade level teams with to map out to pace and align ELA curriculum maps, incorporating writing into the units of study. Monthly professional development sessions will be provided by coaches, school leaders and consultants to increase teachers’ pedagogical knowledge around the instructional shifts reflective of the Common Core Learning Standards for the implication for writing across all genres in all grade levels. Teacher teams will work together to create a school wide rubric for evaluating the writing units. For our English Language Learners, students with disabilities and our bottom third in ELA and Math, we will implement RTI strategies – Tiers 1, 2 and 3 and assess students on an ongoing basis to make adjustment to curriculum and programs. For our ELLs, SWDs and other sub groups, scaffolding will be provided for students based on needs. For example, the use of various graphic organizers like four – square writing, will serve as a tool to help students organize their writing across the content areas. Teachers will use multiple entry points as they facilitate instruction to our students. We will incorporate Balanced Literacy and Benchmark Writing to supplement our writing, 2018-19 CEP 15 utilizing the various ‘bends’ as we plan instruction of the varied students. Grade level teacm will facilitate monthly curriculum alignment session to make necessary adjustments. Curriculum maps will reflect content and strategies applicable for ELLs and Special Needs students, incorporating differentiation in content and pedagogy Families will be provided with information around the CCLS. Information and presentation by staff will be done at meetings such as PTA and workshops. At Tuesday parent sessions, grade level teachers will have sessions around curriculum and instruction for parents. Teachers will send monthly news letter to parents, included will be topics/materials to be covered. All teachers, ELLs and SE students Sept 2018-2019 Grade Level teams and school leaders Parents Sept Parent coordinator and school leaders 2018-2019 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Throughout the school year, multiple opportunities will be provided for parents to learn (AM workshops, Parent Engagement meetings, presentations, small group sessions, and teacher presentations during PTA conferences) to learn about the writing curriculum. The Parent coordinator, PTA, selected teachers, Universal Literacy coach and other support staff will be responsible for the implementing introduction of the writing curriculum during these interactions. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Professional development sessions Per diem and per session for staff Writing curriculum materials Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP X Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A X C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other 2018-19 CEP 16  Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Monthly review of curriculum maps to made necessary adjustment during grade conferences. Review of students’ writing at the end of each unit using rubrics. In October/February/May, we will assess students’ progress on their reading levels. Benchmark assessments which included BOY and EOY Performance Tasks in Math and ELA. All students will be given an ‘On Demand’ piece of grade level writing at the beginning of each writing unit . Students’ writing will be assessed against the rubrics in the writing continuum. In February, we will determine if the students are making progress towards meeting the goal. At least 75% of our students will be show improvement in using the writing process to write across the genres Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) Rubrics and grade specific writing standards will be used against student writing both for in class assignments and assessments (end of unit writing) to measure progress. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 17  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? As a school community, we have successfully sought to improve our school's ability to effectively address barriers to social and emotional developmental health and well-being that will allow students to learn and strive in a safe and healthy community. All constituents contribute to the school community to provide a secure learning environment which promotes student's positive self-image and self-esteem, which in turn leads to positive academic growth. The "Respect for All" pledge is recited every morning along with the National Anthem and the Pledge of Allegiance. This serves to set a foundation for the school day. The schools after-school programs (ELL's and Test Readiness) and CAMBA reinforce a sense of responsibility for community, character building, service learning, and citizenship. Student leaders participate in Student Government and are members of the School Wellness committee which fosters a sense of leadership and ownership of the physical health and success of their school community. The Pupil Personnel Committee (PPC) has developed several documents to track student's that have been identified as "at-risk" to create individualized support plans to monitor their academic, behavior, and emotional progress. To this end, staff members have a unique task to develop meaningful relationships that enhance student learning. As a result, students are afforded increased opportunities to become academically, socially, and emotionally successful. Areas of concern that was discovered in our schools 2017-2018 School Survey under "Rigorous Instruction - Teacher Responses" revealed that:  73% "of teachers say that students build on each other's ideas during class discussion"  64% "of teachers say that students use data or text references to support their ideas"  73% "of teachers say that students provide constructive feedback to their peers and teachers" A careful analysis of our practices has led us to conclude that we must set a goal that will leverage the use of data and the knowledge of children's developmental stages to address student social and emotional needs to strategically plan, deliver, and monitor timely services and supports to students. As a result, all staff will collaboratively work to develop a common understanding around the importance of their contributions in creating a school community that is safe, conducive to learning, and one that fosters a sense of ownership for providing social and emotional developmental supports. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the 2018-19 CEP 18  identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2018, at least 100% of teachers will implement the school-wide referral system, for specific behaviors and a system for tracking data, as measured by a 5% decrease in referrals to the School Based Support Team (SBST). 2018-19 CEP 19  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Provide regular professional development opportunities to deepen teacher understanding of various strategies and approaches to addressing students social, emotional and developmental needs. All Teachers; Sept All Paraprofessionals 2018- June 2019 Lead Teachers, coach, SBST, Guidance and school leaders Provide multiple approaches for building teacher capacity to establish classroom cultures that promote respects, collaboration, and student-to-student discussion. Utilize common planning opportunities for teachers to collaborate, plan, and make curricula adjustments for student which include reviewing and developing data, IEP's, BIP's, Behavior contracts, PBIS incentives, and Classroom behavior management plans. Create and monitor systems of structure which support flexible groups to meet the needs of struggling student's. Students; Teachers; Pararofessionals Sept 2018- June 2019 Lead Teachers, SBST, Guidance, and School leaders Develop learning/behavior intervention plan(s) based on student data, chosen strategies, and individual learning needs 2018-19 CEP 20  for English Language Learners, struggling students, and special needs population. Utilize progress monitoring tool(s) established in 2017-2018 to support student social/academic learning based on data, observations, at-risk needs (STH, ELL's, Hold-Over's, bottom 3rd) such as Pupil Personnel Committee (PPC) tracking sheet and teacher referral forms. Provide "extended" learning experiences that will allow students to take ownership of their learning, social emotional development, and health by collaborating with adults and peers through Teacher/Student Conferencing, Student Government, Boys/Girls Scouts, Anti-Bullying pledge, School Wellness Committee and afterschool (CAMBA). All stakeholders will have an opportunity to engage families. Parents; Students Sept 2018- June 2019 Families will receive two progress reports between report card marking periods. Parents will be encouraged to attend Parent Engagement to Tuesday's to increase parent knowledge of the Common Core based curriculum, state standards, and available resources to support student growth. Parents will receive on-going "anti-bullying" and awareness workshops to support the schools "anti-bullying" pledge throughout the year. Other activities to support parent engagement include:  Publishing parties where parents will be invited to  celebrate our young authors. Family movie nights will be opened to the entire school community and student volunteers will assist.  Holiday shows and special assemblies will enhance our school culture by including the entire school community. Teachers, Coach, Guidance, SBST, Paraprofessionals, and school leaders 2018-19 CEP 21  Math an Literacy game nights will help to create the social, emotional, academic school environment that promotes learning. Structures will be put in place to ensure that each student that has been identified as "at-risk" (STH, hold-overs, lowest 3rd, new into the country, foster-care, emotional) is known by at least one adult who helps to personalize supports informed by the Pupil Personnel Committee (PPC) and monitored by designated PPC members bi-monthly, to impact students' academic and personal behaviors.  PPC Student Tracking Sheets  Teacher Plan of Action Sheets   Student Academic Referral Sheets Student Behavioral Referral Sheets Teachers; Students; Parents Sept 2018- June 2019 Teachers, Coach, Guidance, SBST, and school leaders 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Funds for incentive and resources and materials for students and parents will be used to provide services for students in need. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, 70% of the staff will complete a survey that is connected to them having a mentoring relationship with at least three students in the building that supports the students' social, emotional, and academic learning. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. 2018-19 CEP 22  A monthly review of the Incident Location Summary report will be conducted at safety committee meetings. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 23  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. School Instructional Report 2018 An analysis of this report shows that students in all grades are struggling with completing word problems and constructed responses. For all grades 3- 5 students, on the NYS MATH Examination in the area of constructive response in writing. Grade 3 scored 39%, which was a ten point decrease from last year it was 17 points below the city's average of 56%. Grade 4 scored 55 % which was 2 points above the city average of 53% and also a 12 points increase in scores from the previous year. Grade 5 scored 30% in the area of constructed responses and 7 points below the city's average of 37% and 6 points below the previous year's score of 24%. In reviewing the MOSL Math assessments, the students in grades K-2 are struggled with completing the Math performance task which required students to show their work as part of an accurate response. School quality Guide 2016 -2017 In ELA, 33% met State Standards on the State English test; the average score was 2.6 out of 4.5. In Math, 29% met State Standards on the State Math test; the average score was 2.5 out of 4.5. Framework for Great Schools Report 2016- 2017 The school rated "Good" was obtained in the following areas: Rigorous Instruction, Collaborative Teachers, Supportive Environment, Effective School Leadership and Student Achievement. The school rated in two areas "Fair " in Strong Family-Community Ties and Trust. New York State Report Card 2017- 2018 Our school had 30% of students proficient in Math in 2017. In 2018, 37% of students tested were Proficient in Math. This is an increase of 7%. In ELA, 34% of the students tested were proficient in ELA in 2017. In 2018, 49% of students tested were Proficient in ELA. This is an increase of 15%. 2018-19 CEP 24  Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, teacher teams will collaboratively use protocols to analyze the results of student performance tasks including pre and post formal assessments to improve the following skills - word problems, fractions, and estimation - a measured by a 5% increase in student scoring at or above passing rate in the Math MOSL assessment. 2018-19 CEP 25  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All staff members to include teachers, paraprofessionals, support staff, literacy coaches and administrators 1. Teachers will plan lessons using research based Staff Sept instructional programs such as Go Math, Engage NY and Ready. Lesson planning will be inclusive of the Instructional Shifts in Mathematics and the Common Core Standards with emphasis on fractions, problem solving and estimation in order to meet the needs of all learners. 2. With reference to problem solving, teachers will use rubrics aligned with the NYS Math assessment and the NY MOSL performance tasks for evaluation of student products, use of student data for goal setting, student portfolios, research projects, performance tasks and review and analysis of all sources of data to inform instruction to meet all student levels in this area. 3. Grade level teacher team meetings will take place to analyze student work using protocols, data and address the needs of students. Professional Learning Communities will use the “Notice and Wonder” protocol to review student work and to address the results of assignments. 4. The use of observations and data tracking of pre and post tests as formative assessments will monitor student learning to provide ongoing feedback that can be used by teachers to improve their instruction and improve student learning. 5. Teachers will meet once per week during a common prep with grade level colleagues to develop rigorous common 2018- June 2019 Sept 2018- June 2019 2018-19 CEP 26  Sept 2018- June 2019 core aligned lessons and lesson plans that lead to well-developed student work products in the area of fractions. 6. English Language Learners, Students With Disabilities and other sub groups for Academic Intervention Services (RTI 1 & 2) as well as enrichment activities will be provided to students as needed to help with student progress and improvement 7. Teachers will use multiple entry points during instruction to address the need of all students. Use of technology along with varying instructional strategies will improve student outcomes. Professional Development Staff Sept Professional Development will be provided on differentiated entry points for students to access lesson information in fraction for independent learning and final products. 2018- June 2019 All staff members, including coaches and administrators Coaches will facilitate Professional Development by assisting teachers to more effectively identify and analyze patterns and trends in data in order to inform their instruction. Professional Development will be provided in analyzing individual and group data that support instruction and provide actionable feedback to students. Teachers will be trained in aligning rubrics to tasks and activities in order to be better informed about student learning. Professional development will be presented on providing students with actionable feedback. Teachers will participate in professional development on the Instructional Shifts in Mathematics in order to acquire a deeper understanding of how to adjust their instructional practices. 2018-19 CEP 27 Teachers will be involved in Professional Learning Communities to read and discuss books and professional literature around this topic DOE staff will coordinate professional development with teams of teachers Addressing Student Needs Staff Sept Strategies that will be implemented to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups include, but are not limited to: 2018- June 2019 All staff members, including coaches and administrators Teach academic vocabulary Integrate Oral and Written Language, Instruction in Content Area Teaching, Concrete and Visual Models, Graphic Organizers and SOLVE (problem solving strategy) Strategies to increase parent involvement and engagement Staff Sept All staff members, including coaches , Teachers will provide workshop for parents during PTA meetings on topics such as Mathematics skills and the mathematics practices. Parents 2018- June 2019 parent coordinator and administrators To increase parent involvement and engagement teachers will provide workshop for parents during PTA meetings on topics such as Mathematics skills and the Instructional Shifts in Math Once per month on Tuesdays, Grade level teams will meet with parents to discuss student learning Monthly newsletters will inform parents of the curriculum content activities and what is happening in mathematics specifically in the areas of need. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. During the school year, parents will be invited to afforded multiple opportunities in the school (workshops, meetings, presentations, small group sessions and teacher presentations) to get information around promoting teacher-parent collaborations and parent supporting their children at home. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 2018-19 CEP 28  Consultants to provide professional developments workshops Students’ materials and supplies Parent workshops facilitated by the teachers and parent coordinator Books and professional literature for staff Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E X Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, there should be more evidence of student of varied assessments used in 100% of classrooms. By February 2019 , at least 10% of students must show improvement from the Beginning of the Year analysis. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Monitoring of formative assessments like pre/post assessment, problem solving activities and the analysis of student work using rubrics. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 29  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. ADVANCE REPORT 2017-2018 According to the 2017-2018 ADVANCE report, 67 % of the teaching staff were rated as effective and 22% of the teaching staff were rated developing. Over 50% of the teachers received a rating of Developing on lower in the area of (3b) Questioning and Discussion techniques. The data reveals a need for teachers to increase and improve their level of questioning and enhance their discussion techniques. During classroom visits and informal and formal observations, teachers attempted to use questioning and discussion techniques; however most questions were formulated from the lower level of Blooms Taxonomy and Depth of Knowledge and required recall and or closed ended, which did not promote rigorous discussion amongst students. The focus will be on developing questioning and discussion techniques to support student engagement, improve critical thinking and reasoning skills and enhance discussion. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, school leaders will design and implement a Professional Development plan that will build teacher capacity to develop and utilize higher order questions and discussion techniques in order to promote logical thinking, reasoning and discourse amongst students; which will result in a 5% increase in teachers performance level as reflected in component 3B of the Danielson Framework. 2018-19 CEP 30  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? During Professional Development on Monday’s teachers will use Blooms Taxonomy and Depth of Knowledge as tools to support the development of higher order thinking questions Teachers Sept 2018- June 2019 Administrators, coaches and grade level teacher teams and teachers Administrators will program regularly scheduled Common Planning and Grade Team meetings for teachers to meet in order to plan, discuss best practices using the Danielson Framework and conduct inquiry. Teacher will review and use information from the Effective and Highly Effective columns in the Danielson Framework component 3, as they plan lessons and projects. Teachers Teachers will create and post question and discussion prompts and protocols for students to use during small group tasks and discussions across the content areas. Teachers will develop rubrics for students to use as they engage in self and peer assessments during the lesson and complete tasks and activities. Teachers Teachers Sept 2018- June 2019 Sept 2018- June 2019 Sept 2018- June 2019 Administrators, coaches and grade level teacher teams and teachers Administrators, Coaches, grade level teacher teams and teachers Administrators, Coaches, grade level teacher teams and teachers Administrators, Coaches, grade level teams and teachers Administrators, Coaches, Teachers 2018-19 CEP 31  Teachers will model effective questioning and discussion strategies for students. Administrative team will provide professional development on effective questioning and discussion techniques. Administrative team will collect low inference data on questioning and discussion practices by teachers and students utilized in the classroom during formal and informal observations. Administrative team will provide timely and actionable feedback to inform and improve teachers practices on the use of effective questioning and discussion techniques and strategies. Administrative, teacher teams and support staff will conduct parent workshops as a means of providing parents with strategies and techniques to support their child at home. Teachers Teachers Sept 2018- June 2019 Sept 2018- June 2019 Sept Teachers 2018- June 2019 Teachers Sept 2018- June 2019 Teachers Sept 2018- June 2019 Parents Sept Administrators, Coaches, Administrators, Administrators, Administrators, Coaches, Grade team teachers, teachers, parent coordinator 2018-19 CEP 32  2018- June 2019 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. The school will host a Literacy Parade to promote literacy, discuss the importance of the role of the family in developing positive reading habits, encouraging and supporting rich discussion and questioning around the books read. The school will increase the number of books available for students both in the classroom and at home. Free books will be made available at arrival and dismissal and from the classroom teachers. Every child will get 10 or more books from the school to keep. The school will provide workshops focusing on the Common Core Standards and Curriculum. The school will provide opportunities for parents, grandparents, guardians and care givers to read and discuss books with students. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Administrative staff and the U-Lit coach will provide professional development, modeling and materials for staff. Hard and electronic copies of The Danielson Framework, Common Core Standards, Shifts in Literacy, Bloom's Taxonomy and Depth of Knowledge Wheel will be utilized. 2018-19 CEP 33  The use of NYCDOE resources such as www.teachnyc.org and www.engageny.com for videos and performance tasks. Grade teams will use common preparation periods allotted in the schedule to plan lessons with higher level questions relevant to the units of study across the curriculum. OTPS allocations for consumable materials and workshop materials for both staff and students. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, at least 50% of teachers will have an effective rating in component 3b as reflected in the Danielson's Framework for Teaching. By February 2019, 35% of students, including English as a New Learner and Special Education students will be able to formulate and respond to higher level thinking questions and engage in logical reasoning and discussion with their peers as evidence by the results from the running records. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Classroom observations, analysis of student work, ADVANCE reports, Professional Development and Parent workshop agendas and attendance sheets. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 34  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Framework for Great Schools Report 2015- Rigorous Instruction It is reflected that in this area the school is approaching target with 2.60. During the Quality Review, some parents were unclear of expectations for students as a result of the Common Core Learning Standards implementation. As a result, information will be provided to parents. Some of our parents do not understand what the Common Core Curriculum entails. Even though the school is fully implementing these standards parents are unable to articulate what these standards means for their children. Some parents think it just mean difficult work. However, it is important that parents understand the rigorous work their children are involved in Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, at least 100% of parents will be invited to multiple events in the school (workshops, meetings, presentations, small group sessions and teacher presentations) where parents will be provided with information around the Common Core Learning Standards. 2018-19 CEP 35 Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All parents /Students November 2018 – April 2019 Point persons: Principal, coaches Teachers Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Action/Strategies/Activities Have students return tear-off sheets with parents’ signature stating whether they will attend the events. Incentives such as raffles and pizza parties will be given to classes with the most tear-offs returned. Parents will complete an evaluation form or Exit ticket at the end of meetings stating one thing they learned and suggestions for improvements and topics. Thank you cards (possibly made by students) would be sent to parents who attended events. Parents will receive little incentive for every 3 events they attend. A revised survey will be sent to parents to collect information about their understanding of the implementation of the CCLS. Parents will continue to receive monthly calendars, notices, newsletters and phone messages informing them about the CCLS training or workshops. The school will continue to hold various events such as Coffee with the Principal, Chat and Chew, PTA meetings, class events, many more activities to give information around the CCLS Programs/Professional Development For Parent of ELL and SE students Center for Integrated Teacher Education (CITE) Professional Development – will provide a series of workshops for parents, including parents of ELL/SE students. Each workshop will be offered after school for 60-90 minutes will center on the CCLS. 2018-19 CEP 36  Teacher teams and administrative staff will provide work Other Educational Consultants, such as Generation Ready, will provide workshops for parents ( including parents of our ELLs and SWDs)on the CCLS The ESL teacher and SBST will provide workshops on need basis for parents. For the 40 minutes every Tuesday staff will plan parent workshops to help parents better prepare to support their children with instruction; staff will prepare newsletters, communicate with parents via phone or email or have small group meetings around the CCLS. Parents November 2018 – April 2019 Point persons: Principal,coaches Teachers and families will think of each other as partners in educating children by maximizing communication and increasing collaboration Parents /staff November 2018 – April 2019 Teachers Point persons: Principal, coaches, 3b – Parent and Family Engagement /students Teachers If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Educational consultants will be contracted to provide workshops for parents. Staff members will be paid per sessions to provide workshops for after school hours for parents. Per diem staff will be utilized to sub for teachers as the teachers present workshops for parents during the school day. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP X Title I TA 21st Century Grant SIG Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By January 2019, a parent survey will be developed and distributed to determine further needs for professional development around the CCLS · By January 2019, all sign-in sheets and agendas will be reviewed for attendance 2018-19 CEP 37  · By February 2019, the school will analyze the percentage of tear- offs returned back to the school to assess parents who responded to invitations to CCLS workshops. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Results from surveys, attendance sheets for meeting, log of outreach to parents Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 38  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) Students who need additional support are provided with small group or guidedinstruction inside the classroom during the literacy block. When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Students who need additional support are provided with small group or guided instruction inside the classroom during the literacy block. This is done in small groups and in some cases one – to – one. ELL students are pulled out during the school day and will stay two times after school during the week for up to 4 hours. Some teachers in the ICT classes work with small groups or individuals to do remedial work in ELA in their classrooms. Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Grades K-1 ● Teacher recommendations ● Academic progress (student is unable or delayed in the ability to form sounds associated with letters or forming letters associated with sounds) ● Informal/ Formative assessments Grades 2-3 ● Teacher recommendation ● Fountas & Pinnell Benchmark ● Local Benchmark assessment ● Lack of academic progress Grades 4-5 Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) ● Teachers plan multiple entry points into curricula. Our students who are struggling to achieve the Common Core Standards in English Language Arts receive additional assistance from their qualified classroom teacher, literacy coaches, special education teacher and speech providers. Core knowledge and Expeditionary Learning and are being used in the school and writing is embedded in both these programs. Imaginary learning is also used as a research based reading program to for students to improve their reading skills using technology. During the school day a variety of informational and literary text are used from the DOK, RTI and curriculum 2018-19 CEP 39  ● Level 1 or 2 on NYS ELA Assessment mapping to infuse instruction. ● Fountas & Pinnell Benchmark Assessment ● Local Benchmark assessment Students at-risk of not achieving a level 3 on the NYS ELA assessment Review of: -Report Cards -Writing Samples -IEPS -Part 154 performance standards for LEP/ELL standards for LEP/ELL -Attendance records Grades K-1 ● Teacher recommendations ● Academic progress (student is unable to associate numbers with names nor lack of ability to count) ● Informal /formative assessments Grades 2-3 ● Teacher recommendation ● School’s Baseline assessment Mathematics Students who need additional support are with small group instruction inside the classroom during the math block. This is done small groups and in some case one to one To support our students, math instruction is tiered at various levels. Our AIS students are given more manipulatives and the use of technology to assist them. The ‘GO Math” and program has specific built in programs for Re-teaching of skills and the use of multiple strategies are purposely introduced to struggling students. Students are grouped based on data and support is given to Students who need additional support are provided with small group instruction inside the classroom during the literacy block. This is done in small groups and in some case oneto one. ELL students are pulled out during the school day and stay three times after school during the week and on Saturdays. Some teachers in the ICT classes work with small groups or individuals to do 2018-19 CEP 40  Science ● Local Benchmark assessment ● Lack of academic progress Grades 4-5 ● Level 1 or 2 on NYS Math Assessment ● Math Baseline Assessment ● MOSl (Local Benchmark assessment) ● Students at-risk of not achieving a level 3 on the NYS Mathematics assessment Review of: -Report Cards -Writing Samples -IEPS -Part 154 performance standards for LEP/ELL -Attendance records ● Grade 4 New York State Examination with a Level 1 and Level 2. ● Local Benchmark assessment Review of: -Report Cards -Writing Samples remedial work in ELA in their classrooms. students by a way of one on one instruction in the classroom, or through a pull out program. For struggling English Language learners extended day is provided two times after school during the week for up to 4 hours. The Science specialty teachers have small group instruction inside the classroom during the science instruction. This is done in small groups and in some case one – on - one. Students who need additional support are provided with small group instruction inside the classroom during the science instructional Imaginary Learning. Students who need additional support are provided with small group instruction inside the classroom during the science. This is done in some cases one on one. 2018-19 CEP 41 Students who need support are provided with small group instruction inside the classroom during science. This is done in small groups and in some cases one to one. Students who need additional support are provided with small group instruction inside the classroom during social studies or this is done in small groups and in some areas of literacy instruction. This is done in small groups and in some cases on a one -to one basis or in small groups Small groups & one to one. During the school day. Social Studies At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) -IEPs -Part 154 performance ● Teacher recommendation Review of: -Report Cards -Writing Samples -IEPs -Part 154 performance standards for LEP/ELL -Attendance records Teacher recommendation Review of: - Anecdotal - Incident reports - Parent Concerns Individualized Educational Plan - Outside agency concerns - Pupil Personnel referrals - School Implementation referrals (SIT) Response To Intervention Referrals (RTI) During the social studies periods, teachers have small group instruction to target and support Social Studies content. Rand McNally websites are available for teachers to reinforce map skills. Social Studies will be interwoven in other content areas such as ELA. The Guidance counselor provides At-Risk and mandated counseling to our students. They hold individual and group sessions that target social and behavioral goals. In addition, they participate in the Pupil Personnel and academic Intervention team to provide input for students who are at the great risk of not meeting standards. They help set goals and monitor progress of these children. The school psychologist conducts classroom observations for any student who is at risk of being referred for special education and provides preventative services to the students as a 2018-19 CEP 42  way of avoiding a referral. The school psychologist also participates in the Pupil Personnel 2018-19 CEP 43  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. Provide supplies for students Transportation and money for trips Emotional support through counselor Professional development and other services for parents Celebration for students School uniforms After school activities Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). Fifty-five 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 CEP 44  3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. 2018-19 CEP 45  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. Resumes for staff are carefully scrutinized by the principal and the hiring committee. Upon consensus, prospective staff members are invited for an interview. For classroom teachers, they are asked to conduct a demonstration lesson. For such positions as psychologist and social workers, district supervisors are asked to attend the interview. The committee makes recommendation for hiring and the principal makes the final decision on whether to hire a staff member. Persons are recruited during job fairs, the Open Market or upon recommendation by other professionals. During the recruitment process and prior to the commencement of employment, certification credentials are verified through Human Resources. Teachers’ assignments are based on their qualification. Professional Development is offered to all staff that comes to the school. Staff members are also sent on professional development provided by the DOE and the District prt. This information is then turn keyed within the grades. Administrative staff takes part of CSA's ELI workshops for supervisors and workshops given by the Leadership Academy and DOE staff. All information is facilitated to all staff members during monthly Faculty and Grade Conferences. Our Borough support staff provides ongoing professional development for staff both on-site and off-site, during the school day and after school. There is intra- and inter- visitation by staff to observe best practices. Staff also attends conferences offered by Teacher’s College. The administrative staff also provides support by modeling for staff members. Consultants, such as the Generation Ready and CITE providers are invited to the school to provide differentiated professional development for staff. The data specialist and the literacy coach conduct lunch and learn and other sessions after or before school. All new staff members are mentored by seasoned professionals. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). The school is continuously implementing the CCLS. Units of studies and curriculum maps were developed that are aligned to the CCLS. At the beginning of the school year, staff members are given professional development around these documents. During grade planning teachers meet in teams by themselves or with administrators and/or with coach to plan these lessons for students. Teachers set personal goals around pedagogy and based on their needs, professional development would be planned for these staff members. As administrators conduct the cycles of 2018-19 CEP 46  observation and noticed trends for improvement, professional development sessions would be planned at the school level and by the DOE staff. Curriculum materials including curriculum maps will be reviewed monthly and based on data if need be, adjustment would be made to the curriculum. Grades 3- 5 teachers studied the Item Analysis from the last NYS tests and we have identified areas of need- standards that the school is doing poorly in both in Math and ELA. Professional development sessions will be planned with these critical areas in mind, so that teachers can developed the skills to roll out CCLS standard based instruction with our students. We will hire CITE consultants and other providers to provide professional development sessions including in areas of English Language learning for the staff. Teachers meet in teams on Monday professional development sessions to look at students work, set goals and developed strategies for students. The IEP coordinator and administrative staff will continue to meet with paraprofessionals to discuss how they can support the teachers with delivering standards based instruction. Paraprofessionals are also part of the curriculum planning team. Administrators and coaches will continue to attend workshops around standards and curriculum and turnkey information to staff. The District staff, consultants and other DOE staff and CSA will collaborate with us to provide the necessary professional development for staff. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). 1) School form committee- Pre-K teacher, IEP coordinator, Guidance counselor and the parent coordinator 2) Members develop a timeline for activities, which includes timelines and support. 3) Beginning January, provide ongoing meetings for parents to discuss student readiness for kindergarten and how parents can help in the transition process; introduce kindergarten curriculum and standards to parents; provide families with home-learning activities and have a parent orientation in June, where parents will meet with 2018-19 CEP 47  kindergarten teachers. Kindergarten teachers will discuss curriculum content, expectation of students and parents and provide parents with a list of summer activities and list of school materials needed for Kindergarten students. 4) Assess students, determine need and put plans in place for intervention if needed. School creates a cadre of support /list of services available 5) Have kindergarten activities incorporated from pre-kindergarten. 6) Have kindergarten support staff visit with pre-K students 7) In the fall, have the parent coordinator serve as a bridge for family and as a resource to the kindergarten teachers. 8) In September conduct first Parent Teacher Conference where parents with students in Pre-K to Grade 5 can have an insight of expectations for the new school year. 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. MOSL Committee members comprised of 8 staff members reviewed and selected the assessments for the school year. This information was discussed with staff members at the September faculty conference. During the IPC with the administrators, assessments specific to individual staff member were discussed and the impact that these assessments would have on the teacher’s evaluation. All staff members are mandated to have data binders and individual conferences are planned in December for staff. At these conferences, baseline data will be discussed and targets will be set for students. Assessments results will be continuously reviewed by administrators and staff and instruction and curriculum adjustment would be made so that the varied needs of all students would be met 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) X X Column B Section Reference(s) 16, 20, 28, 31 16, 20 Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Federal Federal 420,037.00 133,796.00 2018-19 CEP 48 X na X 31 na 16, 20, 25, 28, 31 Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Local 11,200.00 0 1,838,540.00 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the 2018-19 CEP 49  participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 CEP 50  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. P.S. 91, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team (SLT), Parent Association (PTA), and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students P.S. 91 will support parents and families of Title I students by: ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; 2018-19 CEP 51  ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability grade-level curriculum and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, Progress Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in 2018-19 CEP 52  the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings, with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between /teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) Template School-Parent Compact (SPC) P.S. 91, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for 2018-19 CEP 53  improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; 2018-19 CEP 54  ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering will all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities 2018-19 CEP 55  ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; 2018-19 CEP 56  ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 2018-19 CEP 57  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 17 School Name PS 91: The Albany Avenue School Borough Brooklyn School Number 091 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Tessa Alleyne Coach Janice Mack ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Mr. R. Pusey Teacher/Subject Area M. Saunders Teacher/Subject Area Y. Woodstock Related-Service Provider D. Innes Superintendent Clarence Ellis Assistant Principal Dion Curtis Coach School Counselor Zwia Merl Parent K. Ogelsby Parent Coordinator Jo Ann Lee Field Support Center Staff Member Other (Name and Title) N/A C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 0 1 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 1 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 300 2018-19 CEP 58 Total number of ELLs 25 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 8.33%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 2017-18 Lang. 1 2 3 2017-18 K 0 0 0 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 4 0 0 0 5 0 0 0 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? Paste response to questions here: Formative Assessments: At P.S. 91 we are constantly looking at students progress. English Language Learners at all grade levels are assessed with Fountas and Pinnell three times per year, to determine their reading level and behavior. Many of our ELL students are functioning between Level A to D reading levels. We use the data to plan learning activities for individual students. For early literacy, we assess students using the Core Knowledge Curriculum chapter pre-tests and post-tests. As learning is going on we informally assess our ELL using a variety of tools. They include conferences, reading strategy checklists, expressive reading checklists, quick writes, exit slip, rubrics etc. These assessments methods give students frequent opportunities to show mastery. The data we gather help us monitor our students learning, and adjust our planning for effective instruction. In addition, teachers use “Think-Pair-Share as a formative assessment strategy. By moving around the classroom and listening to 2018-19 CEP 59  discussions, our teachers gain valuable information into students’ levels of understanding. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? Staff will meet with administrators to discuss progress and next steps for these students. As staff members review the various data sources and they will assess whether or not the ELLs are making progress. Their writing pieces and reading level will be assessed according to their grade levels. When students are on grade level and moving up in proficiency level, then we will know that our students are making the progress. The following assessments would be considered as we consider success for the ELLs- not limited to, however: NYSESLAT results New York State ELA and Math standardized test results (Grades 3 – 8) Running Records Science State test results Social Studies State test results Teacher evaluation Student work sample End of units assessments 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? Paste response to question here: We used data from the NYSESLAT and NYSITELL to help us understand our ELLs' language development. This data help us provide appropriate scaffolds based on students’ proficiency levels. English Language Learners in grades 3-5 are assessed in 3 language modalities twice a year with the English Language Learner Baseline Assessment. This test provides us with valuable information about our students’ language development progress, and helps us to plan for group and individual instruction. Our English Language Learners are also assessed on the ELA performance tasks and on MOSL. Furthermore, at all grade levels our students’ complete pretest and posttest before and after the end of a unit of study. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? Once the summative data as been analyzed, we provide intensive small-group reading intervention and differentiated instruction that targets each student's specific need. This intervention includes phonological awareness, phonics, reading fluency, vocabulary, comprehension and guided reading instruction. We use explicit, direct instruction as the primary means of instructional delivery. Teachers provide small group intervention as needed and with planning multiple entry points allow students to learn at their level. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] Paste response to question here: In order to guide instruction for ELs within the Response to Intervention (RTI) framework (for grades K-5) we review the NYSESLAT, NYS ELA, & Math scores, as well as benchmarks data. Struggling students are identified for tier 1 & tier 2 of RTI intervention services. Depending on their tier placement, the student's program is differentiated in order to work with assigned staff members to receive the needed services. From the various assessments used, the RTI team meets once every two weeks to evaluate the progress of students and to determine how much AIS each child needs- frequency, materials and staffing to be utilized. Tier 3 intervention is provided by an SE teacher. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. We use the NYSESLAT, and ELA to evaluate and inform our ELL program. Data analysis based on the Spring 2017 NYSESLAT, shows that 57.6% of our students (15 out of 26) advance at least one proficiency level, and seven remained at the same proficiency level. Four of our students regressed in their proficiency level. In addition, 7.6% scored at the commanding level. The EDAT tool analysis indicates that across proficiency levels our ELLs scored highest in the speaking modality. (13 of 2018-19 CEP 60  13) Students are having greater difficulty in listening and reading. Thirty-eight percent (5 out of 13) scored high on listening and 30% scored high on reading. This could be attributed to the change in the NYSESLAT test. We will use this information to review our instructional practices to make sure they are aligned to new test format. A comparison of ELA results between ELLs and Non-ELL shows that 0% of ELLs scored at or below the 25th growth percentile (compared to 3.1% of No- ELLs). However 12.1% of ELLs (4 out of 33) are at an at-risk level of 5 or greater. All these students achieved 1 or 2 on ELA and math for two years. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? During professional development, workshops and common planning, the data is presented and reviewed. We used the RLAT report to monitor the NYSELAT performance of students over 3 years. We look at patterns and trends among the different modalities in order to target instruction. Teachers then used the information to plan lesson and to student interventions. Within professional learning communities we analyzed our students' work using a protocols. ENL teacher meets with classroom teachers during planning time to discuss each student's proficiency level and discuss strategies to make content input comprehensible for students. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. Paste response to questions here: The organizational models include Push-in and and Pull out. Students are service in homogeneous as well as heterogeneous groups ranging from 4 to 10 students. We implement stand alone and integrated ENL as per CR Part 154.2. Entering and emerging students receive one unit of integrated and one unit of stand alone ENL. Transitioning and Expanding students receive one unit of integrated ENL. And commanding students are given 1/2 unit of integrated support. Our dually certified ENL teacher pushes-in to the classroom to support classroom teachers in content area instruction, and at times pulls students out to front load vocabulary and to help students develop the English language they need to be successful. The students are placed in age/grade appropriate educational settings giving consideration to all placement criteria and adequate support to gain English Language proficiency as well as access to core content and all programs, services and extra-curricular activities. Standard-based literacy instruction is provided in English for the ENL pull-out program, following the Language Allocation distribution. b. TBE program. If applicable. .Paste response to questions here: P.S. 91 does not offer a TBE program at this time. All parents of newly identify ELL complete a parent survey and program selection form. We keep track and constantly monitor parents choices to see if there are enough students to support a TBE program. As require, we provide parents with a list of schools in the district that have TBE or dual language programs. c. DL program. If applicable. Paste response to questions here: 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? 2018-19 CEP 61  Paste response to questions here: Instruction is delivered by a dually (TESOL and Common Branches) certified teacher, who pushes in during integrated ENL and pull students out during stand alone time. Students are serviced based on their NYSITELL and NYSESLAT scores in accordance with the requirements for English as a new language delineated in the revised CR Part 154. Students whose scores place then at the beginning/entering level receive 180 minutes of stand alone ENL service plus 180 minutes of integrated ENL/ELA service. Emerging students receive 180 minutes of standalone ENL, and 180 minutes of integrated ENL. Transitional receives 90 of integrated ENL and 90 minutes of stand alone. Students at the advanced level receive 180 minutes of integrated ENL service. Students who are proficient(commanding) receive 90 minutes of integrated ENL per week. English is the language of instruction in the program. However, native language support is provided to students when appropriate. The students are heterogeneously grouped within each grade. All students receive instruction in English classrooms in which cluster teachers are deployed to enrich the curriculum. Instruction will be developed around real life, meaningful and purposeful experiences. All of the lesson activities will be research based on strategies such as the Language experience and natural approaches, total physical response, guided reading, and guided writing. . 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. Paste response here: In addition to the Pull-out program, ELL students receive instruction using the workshop model in all the major subjects. Students are given access to all programs, services and extra-curricular activities. The general education staff is given appropriate support and professional development to assist ELL students effectively. Teachers provides content area support by pre-teaching vocabulary words. They activate and build students background language by linking what students already know to the new concepts being taught. They use many ELL methods such as , realias, pointing, repetition, pantomiming, paraphrasing,graphic organizers and other visuals to scaffolds and provide comprehensible input to the students. We provide native language support through the use of bilingual dictionaries. French and Spanish speaking students are taught to identify cognates and use programs such as Google translate. We provide students with the opportunities to build academic language by exposing them to different tier words and a varied of text to build comprehension aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? .Paste response to question here: The only program for English Language Learners P.S. 91 offers is the Freestanding ENL program. As required, new Spanish speaking students take the Spanish LAB-R. We use the result to get an idea of the student’s literacy level in his first language upon arrival. Students that speak others languages are interviewed and tested informally by personnel who speak their language and is familiar with the education system of the student’s country of origin. This helps us determine the student’s overall cognitive and linguistic development. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status Paste response to questions here: We are aware that any group of learners will be made up of students who are at different stages in their language acquisition and cognitive development; therefore we strive to provide instruction in such a way that addresses the needs of each student. ENL and classroom teachers works collaboratively with all these subgroups of students to differentiate the process and content for students as they facilitates instruction. a. SIFE. At PS 91 we use the State SIFE Questionnaire to screen students to determine if they are Students with Limited or Interrupted Formal Education. We understand that these students face unique language, cultural, literacy, and socio-2018-19 CEP 62  emotional issues and challenges. The ENL, classroom teachers and guidance counselor collaborate around providing both emotional and academic support. We try to build our SIFE's population language and content knowledge by tapping into the skills and knowledge they bring to us. This allow us to provide focused academic instruction to bridge their gap in knowledge. Some of the practices we use to connect with Students with Limited or Interrupted Formal Education include b. Newcomer students at our school are service with the intention of giving them the language skills they need to function successfully in their new country, community and school. These students are place with English-speaking peers in an age appropriate environment in order to present them with language acquisition opportunities and extrinsic motivation as well as support from their peers. Our goal is to promote structure interactions for these students. Newcomers receive ENL instruction designed to develop both BICS and CALP. Literacy and language development takes place through students participation in the reading and writing workshop in their classrooms as well as further specialized instruction from the ENL teacher in small settings. The ENL and classroom teachers work together to make content accessible to these students by employing sheltered English and a wide range of scaffolding techniques and approaches. These include group work, reading aloud from texts that that are above students instructional level, using photos and charts, restating the material in simpler language, rewriting the material in simpler language, acting out, writing frames and sentence starters, drawings, etc. In addition, newcomers receive extra attention through after school programs and access to literacy technology. c. Developing ELLs are provided with literacy development in all areas. They actively participate in all learning tasks and work cooperatively with their peers. Teachers use KWL charts and other graphic organizers with these students to help them increase their comprehension and build vocabulary.. They use story maps to help students visualized the stories they read. At the same time they focus students' attention on story structure to help improve their comprehension. d. Long Term. Our data shows that the majority of our long term ELLs achieved this status because they were unable to pass the reading or writing portion of the NYSESLAT. The ENL and classroom teachers collaborate to provide long term ELLs with consistent, rigorous routines to help them succeed.They receive explicit targeted instruction focusing on building the CALP they lack so that they can achieve mastery of reading and writing. Teachers model comprehension using strategies such as QAR (Question-Answer-Relationship) and DRTA (Direct Reading-Thinking Activity. Students practice these strategies independently and in small groups. e. Former ELLs are provided with services for two years after passing the NYSESLAT. They receive 90 minutes of integrated ENL in ELA or the other content areas according to their needs. They are also provided the test accommodations giving to the other ELLs. If the student has an IEP or 504 plan we determine which accommodation is most suitable and beneficial in order to maximize their potential for achievement on all exams. The ENL teacher, as well as the classroom teachers will follow the Children’s Initiative Curriculum using the balanced literacy. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? Paste response to question here: Students' IEPs are constantly reviewed and this drive their instructional program. Classroom teachers differentiate the content/process to meet the needs of the students. Some strategies used include breaking learning into small steps, the use of diagrams, graphics and pictures, lots of modeling and scaffolding students' assessments are analyzed and curriculum and instruction are adjusted to meet the needs of the students. Students who can function in a least restrictive environment for part of the day/subject areas are given such placement dictated by the flexibilty of the schedule. Materials used to maximize 2018-19 CEP 63  the accessibility of the curriculum and to accelerate our students English language acquisition includes Smart Boards, computer and web based programs such as Brianpop ESL, Imagine Learning and Starfall. Our ELL-SWDs also have access to books on tape, CD players, and Leap Frog pads. Other language materials used include Righby's "On Our Way to English", Options publishing's "Best Practices in Reading" , leveled libraries with culturally relevant books and bilingual dictionaries. These materials help with English language development by providing ELL-SWD with different ways of accessing the text and language at their point of instruction. These materials also allow ELL-SWD to function independently and learn at their own pace. Teachers use RTI strategies for thse students. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? Paste response to question here: An analysis of performance data on the NYSESLAT, ELA, and math test was done to determine the needs of our ENLs’ in these areas. This past year, the majority of our ENLs’ scored a level two on the state ELA and math tests. We especially believe that with additional support in the math content area, all our students will be able to meet standards. Therefore, more support in the language of mathematics, including specifically word problem strategies and math vocabulary will be provided. In addition, students in need are provided with tier 1 & 2 intervention whereby the are pulled our for at least 1 period a day for AIS. After school and Saturday programs would be offered to these students beginning February 2018 in all content areas. ELA- The program targeted for our ENLs in ELA is Language Learning and the school-wide program entitled classroom libraries. In addition we are using the Core Knowledge Curriculum, Expeditionary Learning material and Teachers' College Reading and Writing for our students. These materials are differentiated to meet the needs of our students. An array of 'just right' books in every genre is provided for our students. Math – The Go Math program is used throughout the school in grades PreK - 5. The program bolsters students’ understanding through a highly interactive learning environment that presents even the most abstract concepts with ease. The program is presented to students in the context of real-world examples. ENL students are able to develop fluency in critical skills, math reasoning, conceptual understanding and problem-solving skills. In Social Studies and Science, theme- based materials are used giving students real experiences with hands-on activities. Students are also exposed to Brain Pop and Imagine Learning, technology based programs. Our school is also piloting ONMYOWN to build ENL students comprehension skills. RAZ Kids and STAR Fall are technology based programs that we used with our ENL students. As a way of providing flexible program for our students, during math and/or literacy students have the opportunity to regroup with other students on their levels from different classes to receive homogeneous instruction. The IEPs for ELL students are constantly reviewed. Students data is analyzed on an ongoing basis and as a school we strive to move our ELL students from the more restricted to the least restricted environment. This process may be increments of time from a few periods within the day, to half day and then to full days 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. Paste response to question here: We target newcomers who are at the beginning level of English proficiency for intervention in ELA, Math and the content areas. One way we do this is by through peer tutoring. Newcomers are paired with students who speak their language and that are either proficient or advance in English. This is done in all subject areas. Newcomers also attend the title III program. Like the regular population, they participate in the after school programs, where they get additional help with reading, and writing. They also receive homework help. The classroom teachers make input comprehensible in all subjects by scaffolding and using a variety of tools such as graphic organizers, sentence starters, pictures, gestures and realia. Intermediate and advance students who are not making sufficient progress are also targeted for intervention. These students receive AIS, attend the title III program, and are given priority in test preparation or Saturday academy. Our goal is to help these struggling ELLs learn to apply and use comprehension and decoding strategies as they read across the curriculum. As ELLs at our school reach proficiency by passing the NYSESLAT they continue to receive extra attention to ensure academic success. Students are able to access materials such as thesarus and dictionaries in their native language to assist them. As a result of data from assessments described in this documents students are grouped and provided with the necessary materials to enhance their success. 2018-19 CEP 64  9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? Paste response to question here: For the new school year, to meet the needs of our ENL population, students will be provided with more opportunities for guided reading to build on their reading level so that students can read on grade level. We will incorporate Teachers' College writing curriculum whereby the teachers will provide scaffolding and various strategies to build on our students' writing skills. Information from the item analysis from the NYS examination and our MOSL assessments clearly showed that our ELL students are lacking in vocabulary acquisition, basic comprehension skills like finding the main idea and inferring and in the area of writing narrative texts. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? Paste response to question here: No programs for ELLs will be discontinued. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. Paste response to question here: : ELLs are afforded equal access to all school programs. Like the monolingual population, ELLs are invited to and attend enrichment and supplemental services such as Saturday academy , Title III, and test sophistication programs offered during the winter and spring vacation. Over 75% of our ELL students take advantage of these programs 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. Paste response to question here: A range of instructional materials are used to suport English language learners at P.S. 91. Classrooms are equipped with Promethean Boards and Internet connectivity. In addition to all the resources available on the World Wide Web, we use the Brain-Pop ESL web based program, and Imagine Learning. Language material we use include "Finish Line New York ELLs " by Continental press, Righby's "On Our Way to English", Options publishing's "Best Practices in Reading" , leveled libraries with culturally relevant books and bilingual dictionaries. Students used trade books for social studies along with texts books and the FOSS kits for science. Our school is also piloting ONMYOWN to build ENL students comprehension skills. Also,RAZ Kids and STAR Fall are technology based programs that we used with our ENL students. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Paste response to question here: Students are provided with bilingual reference resources, such as bilingual dictionaries, glossaries and books which are all part of the classroom library. Children's Literature in student native language is also provided. Students also have access to online resources like Google translate, picture dictionaries. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. Paste response to question here: The required services support and resources at P.S. 91 correspond to students’ ages and grades. Students are serviced in age appropriate groups with resources appropriate for their grade and age. Early childhood students (K-3) are grouped together based on proficiency levels. Among the resources used with these students are, “On our way to English” and Pearson’s Sails literacy series. These resources are used as part as our balanced literacy approach. In addition, Starfall, a web based resource is used with these students. Fourth and fifth grade are also grouped by proficiency levels. Resources used with these students include the Rigby literacy series and BrainPOP ESL. These resources are leveled and grade appropriate. They help our ELLs develop reading and writing skills. Teachers provide differentiated and tailored instruction for all ELL students to help students master content required for their age/grade levels. Materials are tiered and scaffold for students. For example, in the Expeditionary Learning, the content is differentiated for the ELL students. During our math lesson, our ELL students who are not mastering the skills are provided with the re-teach activities. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? 2018-19 CEP 65  Paste response to question here: Our school does not shares a building 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). Paste response to question here: At the beginning of the school year, parents are invited to the orientation where they are given the opportunity to meet the teachers and to discuss and ask questions about their child's program for the school year. The parent coordinator, the administrative staff and the ESL schedule separate meetings with ELL parents ( providing translation when necessary) to give information about our school. Parents are invited to meet the teachers on Tuesdays afternoon. Our ELL parents are encouraged to attend out PTA meetings, Coffee with the Principal and other activities afforded to all parents. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? Paste response to question here: Our school does not offer any language electives. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? Paste response to question here: Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? Paste response to question here: Our ESL teacher attends numerous workshops provided by the DOE and turnkey information to classroom teachers during Mondays PD or during lunch n' learn sessions. The school also has contracted vendors that come in at least 4 times a year to provide half day workshops for our ENL teacher and classroom teachers. During our Tuesday Book clubs some of the books and the articles are centered around educating our ELL students. Various members of the school based support team also attend and provide information for the general staff, including the PC around supporting our ELL students. Paste response to question here: The administrative staff and coaches provide ongoing PD to our ENL teacher so that he can support the ELL students as they engage in the CCLS. This teacher is given PD around the shifts in Math and ELA and and how he can incorporate these shifts in his lesson. He is also part of the weekly common planning teams and monthly curriculum adjustment team so that he can better infuse the CCLS in his lessons. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. Paste response to question here: 2018-19 CEP 66  1. In regards to professional development , our staff attends workshops and professional development. Workshops are offered by the Network, the Office of English Language Learners and CITE. Our monthly on-site staff professional development throughout the year is another opportunity for all teachers to receive training geared toward the specific needs of our ELL population. Areas of emphasis include writing strategies, aligning the CCLS, balanced literacy, differentiation of instruction and using data from the NYSESLAT, Acuity and Schoolnet to drive instruction. In addition, the ENL teacher is encouraged to attend the yearly NYSABE and TESOL conferences. The ENL teacher offers support and suggestions to classroom teachers , and turn keys information obtained from professional development and conferences attended. In sum, intensive professional development provided to the entire staff by administrators, instructional specialists, and specialists in ESL strategies and standards. The PD will take place in workshops, grade conferences, staff conferences, and study groups. Training on the components of a comprehensive balanced literacy program using the workshop model. Application of the workshop with English as a Second Language and ELA scaffolding instruction and methods of assessments of content-area learning and language development. 2.Staff are provided sustainable professional development in the area of standard based instruction. The standards are incorporated to expose students to scaffold their learning outcomes to gain greater academic success. We would regularly articulate with the classroom teachers to monitor ELL’s progress and provide the academic support necessary to help the students better transition into the middle school. Lunch and Learns are scheduled through out the course of the school year. We plan to use the NYC DOE Educators Resources to show teachers the following videos: Common Core Framework for ELLs, Teaching Common Core-aligned Math to ELLs, and Challenges and Opportunities in the English Language Arts Common Core Standards. 3.To support our monolingual teachers of ELL students, P.S. 91 will offer 7 ½ hours of professional development on ESL strategies. These on-going sessions will take place during common preps, lunch period (lunch and learn), or on days that are designated as Chancellor’s Conference Day. The first meeting is in September, and subsequent meetings will take place once a month between October and January.. Staff is provided with professional development designed to address various educational issues encountered by the ELL community. teachers align curriculum to support the CCLS to develop activities that engage best classroom practices. The Center for Integrated Teacher Education tailors workshops geared towards meeting this requirement. Sign-in sheets and agenda are kept in a binder in the main office and is maintained by the school secretary. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? Paste response to question here: 1. Parent orientation is offered at the beginning of the school year by the PTA. All parents are asked to participate in the Parent Teacher Association. During the monthly meeting all parents are given an opportunity to speak and voice their concerns. In addition, Coffee with the Principal is another forum to involve the parents of English Language Learners. Staff who are bilingual are available during these sessions to provide language assistance. The Center for Integrated Teacher Education provides a venue for educating parents around the city-wide expectations as well the CCLS. In supporting the parental involvement effort, the parent coordinator will be in constant communication with all parents. Through the outreach, the PC will schedule workshops designed specifically for parents of ELLs. Such workshops include instruction for certified learning leaders, nutrition courses, technology, parenting classes, updated materials focused on the various school curricula, articulation to Middle School, and assessments and a host of other workshops.. Parent of ELL students receive school related materials in English and in other languages. Translation services are provided by DOE contracted vendors. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Paste response to question here: 2. The needs of parents are evaluated by yearly NYC school survey, parental referral form , Parent Survey / Program Selection Form and the Home Language Identification Survey. The parent coordinator analyses these reports and as part of her PD plan, incorporate the activities to meet the needs of the parents. Parental involvement activities address the needs of the parents in 2018-19 CEP 67  several ways. Some ways are through attendance at parent conferences, workshops, PTA meetings and discussion. Parents are also volunteers in the class and in the lunchroom. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Paste response here: 2018-19 CEP 68 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Tessa Alleyne, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 CEP 69  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: PS 91: The Albany Avenue Schoo School DBN: 17K091 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Tessa Alleyne Dion. Curtis Jo Ann Lee Roger Pusey K. Ogelsby M. Saunders Title Principal Assistant Principal Parent Coordinator ENL/Bilingual Teacher Parent Teacher/Subject Area T. Kingshepherd Teacher/Subject Area Janice Mack Nancy Clark Zwia Merl Clarence Ellis Coach Coach School Counselor Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 10/1/17 10/1/17 10/1/17 10/1/17 10/1/17 10/1/17 10/1/17 10/1/17 10/1/17 10/1/17 10/1/17 10/1/17 10/1/17 10/1/17 10/1/17 2018-19 CEP 70  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 17 School Name: PS 91 Superintendent: Mr. C Ellis The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Romelio Joan Pusey Lee ESL teacher Parent Coordinator Yes No Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. During initial enrollment, parents of students entering New York city schools for the first time are interviewed by a certify pedagogue and complete the Identification survey to identify the student's home language (HLIS part 3). Students transferring from other New York City public schools complete the department of education language preference questionnaire. In addition, all parent fill out an emergency contact card at the beginning of each year. This card is readily available in case of emergencies and states the parents preferred language of communication. The information gathered from these sources is updated in ATS PARU screen, and is used to insured that parents have language access, so that they can fully participate in their children's education. 2018-19 CEP 71  2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Arabic French Haitian Creole English Spanish Wolof 4 1 22 254 15 1 1.38 0.35 7.61 84.78 5.9 0.35 4 1 23 242 16 1 1.38 0.35 7.96 83.74 5.54 0.35 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. none Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. Annual handbooks, and calendars, Sept 2017, monthly Newsletters, beginning of the month Parent-teachers conferences announcements/ Recess notifications September and November 2017, March and May 2018 Letters from the principal After-school October 2017 program information Bilingual staff with the support of Google translate, will be used to translate these documents. Bilingual staff with the support of Google translate, will be used to translate these documents. We will use the existing pre-translated templates available through the intranet. Bilingual staff with the support of Google translate, will be used to translate these documents. Bilingual staff with the support of Google translate, will be used to translate these documents. 2018-19 CEP 72  State testing dates March 2018 Bilingual staff with the support of Google translate, will be used to translate these documents. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide Parent-Teacher conferences, September and November 2017, March and May 2018 PTA meetings Awards Night, Curriculum night monthly monthly Pre-K, K, &5 th Grade Graduation June 2018 interpretation service(s)? We will use the language line for interpretation. Also we will tap into our bilingual staff members to provide on site interpretation. Qualified bilingual school staff will be used for interpretation. (per session. Qualified Bilingual staff members will be used for interpretation. Qualified Bilingual staff members will be used for interpretation. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. In the event of a school emergency using the emergency contact cards, our bilingual staff will contact parents by phone. For languages not spoken by our staff members we will used the 24/7 over the phone interpretation service. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. The Language Access Coordinator will conduct a school-wide presentation at the beginning of the school year in which he will make staff members aware of Chancellors regulation A-663. Staff will be made aware of the different services provided by the Translation and Interpretation Unit, Intranet resources, and the funding available to schools for language assistance services for limited English proficient parents. Also, office staff will be given copies of the Language Identification Guide and will be trained on how to use it to determine the language a parent speaks. Furthermore, all staff members will be send a letter during the school year, to remind them of their responsibility to communicate with LEP parents. 2018-19 CEP 73  Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) Limited-English proficient parents will be made aware of their rights to receive information in their preferred language as follows. First we will prominently display welcome posters at the main entrance as well as the back entrance where students are dismissed. Signage describing visitors access will be posted in the nine covered languages to ensure parents are able to reach the office. Parents will be provided with LEP parents who speak any of the covered languages will be giving the brochure "Parents' Guide to Language Access". Parents can also access them in our parent room. We have also posted information pertaining to Section VII of Chancellor's Regulations A-663 on our school webpage for parent to view. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? At the end of each event parents will complete a survey in which they will rate and give feedback regarding the language service they received. These surveys will be looked at carefully by the bilingual staff to determine possible improvements. 2018-19 CEP 74 
