2018-19 COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (CEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 21K100 School Name: P.S. 100 THE CONEY ISLAND SCHOOL Principal: CHIARA SPAGNOLO 2018-19 CEP 1  Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 CEP 2  Section 1: School Information Page School Information School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: PS 100 Coney Island School 21K100 332100010100 PreK-5 School Number (DBN): 2951 West 3 rd Street, Brooklyn, NY 11224 718-382-2760 718-382-2765 Phone Number: Fax: Chiara Spagnolo Email Address: cspagnolo3@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Chiara Spagnolo Joanne Bullaro Irene Tsepelman Tatum Metellus N/A N/A N/A District Information Geographical District: 21 Superintendent’s Office Address: Isabel DiMola Superintendent: 1401 Emmons Avenue Brooklyn, NY 11235 idimola@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718-648-0209 Phone Number: 718-648-2165 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) Brooklyn South Mauriciere deGovia FSC: Executive Director: 2018-19 CEP 3  Executive Director’s Office Address: 415 89 th Street Brooklyn, NY 11209 mdegovi@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 718-759-4889 Phone Number: Fax: 2018-19 CEP 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) ChiaraSpagnolo Joanne Bulllaro Irene Tsepelman Tatum Metellus Elena Fallon Laurie Kominsky *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/Staff Member/ Staff Member/ Staff 2018-19 CEP 5  Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Brooke Fariello Nancy Schwartz Lana Khvatkovsky Sandra TolkarMarchese MariyaGold Anna Samoylovich BatoolFozia ZoyaReznik Member/Staff Member/ Staff Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/Parent Member/Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent 2018-19 CEP 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with 2018-19 CEP 7  the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement 2018-19 CEP 8  Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Our School Mission Statement: P.S. 100 is a school built on a foundation of academic excellence with a vision for providing all of our students with well rounded learning experiences through the arts, engineering, technology, literacy and mathematics. Our community of learners includes students, teachers, staff and parents who are committed to high standards in preparing our students for success in college and career. We engage, inspire and challenge all of our students to become productive, caring citizens, leaders and positive contributors to our community and society. 2018-19 CEP 9  2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. P.S. 100 The Coney Island School is a high performing elementary school with 731 students in grades Pre-K to 5. PS 100 is located between Brighton Beach and Coney Island in Brooklyn, NY. The population includes White, African-American, Hispanic, and many immigrants from Russia and Central Asian nations. Three hundred eighty-five students have been identified as having a home language other than English and 155 of these students (about 22.83% of the student population) are English Language Learners (ELL). Special education students account for about 16% of the population. We believe in developing the whole student through the arts, engineering and technology programs we offer to all our students. As we move forward as a school community we believe in the alignment of the arts and technology to enrich and enhance the standard based curriculum. Classes are heterogeneously mixed to maximize performance for below and above grade level students. Our classrooms will become a resource for students to develop into independent life long learners. Teachers provide differentiated instruction and use various UDL (Universal Design for Learning) strategies in order for our students meet the common core standards. Through data analysis we are able to identify specific needs of our students and use direct services such as AIS, RTI, and counseling by a bilingual guidance counselor. In addition, we offer targeted after-school programs in writing enrichment, remediation, vocabulary, phonics, and ELL instruction. In our ongoing efforts to have all of our students meet their full potential, we provide many programs for academic achievement and enrichment through in-school programs. Our goals are to support student growth through differentiated instruction, the analysis of relevant data, and designing curriculum to meet the needs of all students. Our school climate fosters a positive environment which enables students to develop their academic strengths and nurture their emotional and social growth. Students feel secure knowing that they have the support of the school community. Our motto is, “PS 100, Where Every Child Has a Voice”. This motto is visible in the opportunities for children to be active participants in our school community. Students in the fifth grade are monitors for Pre-K and Kindergarten students during class line-up and lunch periods, serve as Principal Monitors, Student Government, Green Team members and as Morning Announcers. These roles give them a sense of responsibility and ownership of the school. Each year, we participate in “Respect For All” week, a NYC Department of Education incentive to promote tolerance and positive behaviors. Moving forward we have implemented a Positive Behavior Intervention System- Deno's Dolphins- to promote a positive and safe environment for all. In 2018 we were named a Respect For All school. While Families are highly valued members of our school community, we feel we can continue to enhance the inclusion of families in our school life. Families have access to monthly workshops. Topics include: understanding the Common Core Learning Standards, college and career readiness skills and specific strategies to engage learners with special needs as well as our English Language Learners. Parents are invited to meet monthly at a casual Breakfast with the Principal where any topic of their choice is discussed. Through our partnership with the Jewish Community Board we have Adult ESL classes two days a week for our community members. The school also has a Parent Welcome Center where parents can meet with school staff and find school related materials. The school website allows parents and students to be updated with daily assignments, school events, links and direct communication through email. Teachers use Classroom Dojo, a behavior modification program, which sends reports to parents and serves as a method of communication. After dismissal on Tuesdays, time has been allocated for teacher-parent communication, which may include meetings or telephone calls. 2018-19 CEP 10  3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. Three hundred eighty-five students have been identified as having a home language other than English and 155 of these students (about 22.83% of the student population) are English Language Learners (ELL). Special education students account for about 16% of the population. Through data analysis we are able to identify specific needs of our students and use direct services such as AIS, RTI, and counseling by a bilingual guidance counselor. The data analysis showed that our students could not identify relevant information in a text, there was a lack of understanding between Non-Literal and Literal language and conceptual math. In addition, we offer targeted after-school programs in writing enrichment, remediation, vocabulary, phonics, and ELL instruction. In our ongoing efforts to have all of our students meet their full potential, we provide many programs for academic achievement and enrichment through in-school and after-school programs. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. Framework Elements include our efforts: Our area of strength has been to have a Collaborative School Environment for teachers. There are many staff teams: Professional Development Team has input in designing and presenting PDs, an Instructional Team sets and evaluates instructional goals, the School Leadership Team oversees school policies with the collaboration of teachers, parents and paraprofessionals; and grade and vertical teams look at data, curriculum and student work. Teachers are encouraged to attend workshops, Intra/Inter visitations to promote best practices and take advance classes. While Families are highly valued members of our school community, we feel we can continue to enhance inclusion of families in our school life. Families have access to monthly workshops. Topics include: understanding the Common Core Learning Standards, College and Career readiness skills and specific strategies to engage learners with special needs. Parents are invited to meet monthly at a casual Breakfast with the Principal where any topic of their choice is discussed. We have included Enrichment Cycles into our class schedules where students engage in Project Based Learning on world wide problems/concerns. At the end of the six week cycle parents are invited to attend our Enrichment Showcase, highlighting the work the students accomplished and all they have learned in the process. The school also has a Parent Welcome Center where parents can meet with school staff and find school related materials. The school website allows parents and students to be updated with daily assignments, school events, links and direct communication through email. Teachers use Classroom Dojo, a behavior modification program, which sends reports to parents and serves as a method of communication. After dismissal on Tuesdays, time has been allocated for teacher-parent communication, which may include meetings or telephone calls. 2018-19 CEP 11  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 21K100 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration PK,0K,01,02,03,04,05 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 793 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 41 40 28 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 13 9 25 24 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 50.0% % Attendance Rate 44.1% % Reduced Lunch 16.6% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) 0.3% 5.4% 87.3% % Multi-Racial % Black or African American % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 2.15 0% 2% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 71.6% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 98% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A N/A YES YES YES Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A YES YES YES Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A YES N/A YES High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 64 65 93.6% 5.9% 16.6% 3.0% 3.5% 0.8% 2 4% 9.7 67.2% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No N/A N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A YES YES N/A N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 CEP 12  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. A review of this year’s formative and summative data, including NYS ELA/Math scores, MOSL Assessments, Pre/Post Unit Assessments with Exemplars, Beginning/Middle/End of Year Math Assessments and NYC School Quality Guide, showed that more of the students are having difficulty with the application and explanation of word problems. This is due to limited language access and much needed vocabulary skills needs which impact their basic reading and writing skills. Students are able to compute mathematical equations. Difficulties lie in understanding the process, steps and various strategies to solve word problems. Through our work with Exemplars and Collaborative Conversations, there has been an improvement in language access and vocabulary skills. Our goal is to continue to build on this while strengthening our critical thinking skills throughout all grades. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Through scaffolded, rigorous math instruction, by June 2019, 75% of students in grades K-5 will reach their individual learning targets in mathematics as measured by school created Beginning of the Year, Middle of the Year and End of Year benchmark assessments. 2018-19 CEP 13  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Review of the item skills analysis when released (June results are being distributed at our first grade meetings). PDs on understanding item skills analysis data to direct instruction and Parent communications. Teachers Administer Go Math Assessment. Grade Teams analyze data to inform instruction and identify individual learning targets for students. Professional Development on Math Exemplars; Professional Development and support on aligning EngageNY and GoMath through our Partnership with Generation Ready Consultant- Anthony Volforte Teachers Teachers Inter/Intra- Visitations for Best Practices in Math Exemplars and UDL Strategies. Teachers Develop and monitor student performance through chapter Pre/Post assessments in using Math Exemplars with a focus on language access. This will be for approximately 5-6 weeks with a pre-assessment, instruction/mid point assessments and a post assessment Teachers will meet to discuss student work, progress and additional strategies to improve skills. Teachers 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Administrators and Grade Teams. Administration and Grade Teams (Inquiry) Administrators and Grade Teams. Administrators, PD and Instructional Teams. Administrators, Grade Teams. Upon release (usually October, 2018) September 2018 Beginning September 2018 - October 2018; Ongoing January 2019-June 2019 October 2018- January 2019 Assessments throughout units of study; Assessments in January and May. How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. 2018-19 CEP 14  Parents will be invited to workshops on Math Exemplars (Introduction in September and on going). The Parent Coordinator, together with administration, will establish a schedule for grade teams to present workshops to parents throughout the year. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Programming has been set to allow Teachers to have at least 2 common preps a week for discussions and inquiry work. We also align the budget to support Inter/Intra- Visitations. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A X C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Through scaffolded, rigorous math instruction, by February 2019, 50% of students in grades K-5 will reach their individual learning targets in mathematics as measured by school created BOY, MOY, EOY benchmark assessments. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) The instrument of measure we will use is school created Baseline, Mid Year and End of Year assessments that are aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards, GoMath and Engage NY. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 15  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? Historically our Students with Disabilities in our ICT classes as well as Self- Contained classes make minimal progress in meeting the Common Core Learning Standards for their grade. Through our benchmark assessments, progress monitoring of annual goals, teacher made assessments/tasks students have made progress or met their individual annual goals based on their Individualized Educational Plans. With all students in our ICT classes and students receiving services in general education classes receiving Standard Promotional Criteria, meeting the Common Core Learning Standards is a challenge. These needs will be addressed through creative programming and planning. We will be departmentalizing our 4th and 5th grade Self- Contained classes for ELA and Math. We are implementing flexible programming in grades 3, 4 and 5 to meet the needs of our students in the least restrictive environment. This will allow for our SWD students to engage with other students in collaborative conversations to promote critical thinking while addressing their immediate needs through multiple entry points. All of our lower grade teachers are trained in Orton Gillingham and we are planning to train all of our Special Education Teachers to use within their small group instruction. Data from Orton Gillingham has showed an increase in reading and speaking for our English Language Learners. Spire, an Orton Gillingham based program, is what the DOE is promoting IEP teachers to use for their small group instruction. Data from our IEP teacher working with small groups has shown an increase in those students meeting their individual targets in class. Though this instruction and an increase in Collaborative Conversations we will be able to increase the students receptive and expressive language in ELA. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Through providing a safe, challenging environment, by June 2019, 75% of Students with Disabilities in grades 3 and 4 will meet their individual learning targets in ELA as measured by Running Records, teacher created pre/post writing unit assessments, MOSL Performance Assessment and On-Demand Short Responses to Literature. 2018-19 CEP 16  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs,  professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Professional Development of Teachers and Special Education teachers in Orton Gillingham and Guided Reading. Staff September/October 2018 Administration, Teachers and Professional Trainer of Orton Gillingham. Classroom Teachers, Administrators ALL Staff October 2018- May 2019 September 2018/October 2018 Administration and SIT Team October 2018-May 2019 Administration and all teachers Administration/ Special Education Liaison /Staff Special Education Staff/ General Education Staff Inter and Intra Visitations of best practices of UDL Strategies- Guided Reading and Orton Gillingham Instruction Implement Flexible Programming/Departmentalization in Grades 4 and 5 Special Education Teachers will engage in Inquiry work with the Special Education Liaison (monthly) to identify students who have not made progress in reading levels and comprehension; identifying strategies to strengthen instruction in these components. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Orton Gillingham is a response to intervention to help remediate children with difficulties in reading fluencies and language acquisition. Orton Gillingham enforces the rules to understand spelling patterns in the English Language. Used as a Response to Intervention this will help strengthen our reading and writing skills for Students with Disabilities. Consistency between home and school will strengthen the child's ability to successfully meet their learning targets in reading and writing. Our Special Education Liaison and Literacy Coach in collaboration with our Parent Coordinator will hold Parent Workshops throughout the year to inform parents about our Orton Gillingham program, teaching them exercises to practice engaging in conversation with their children. Our Literacy Coach in collaboration with our Librarian will hold a Parent Workshop engaging parents to read with their children and ask important questions about their reading. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment 2018-19 CEP 17  Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Professional Learning on Orton Gillingham and Guided reading books will be purchased with funding. We will support teachers with Inter Visitations for Best practices with UDL strategies. We will also use Parent Engagement funds to support our Parent Workshops. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Through providing a safe, challenging environment, by February 2019, 50% of Students with Disabilities in grades 3 and 4 will meet their individual learning targets in ELA as measured by Running Records, teacher created pre/post writing unit assessments, MOSL Performance Assessment and On-Demand Short Responses to Literature. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Beginning and End of the Year ELA MOSL; Teacher created pre/post assessments for writing units; Fountas and Pinnell Benchmarks (Beginning, Middle and End of Year) Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 18  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Through administrative observations and analyzing of data, it was noticed that student writing has shown improvement yet continue to struggle with relevant details and building ideas/sentences. This work will continue by developing structures that allow the majority of teachers to engage in structured, inquiry based professional collaboration around Collaborative Conversations and a book study utilizing The Writing Revolution. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Through effective, culturally respectful teacher collaboration, by June 2019, 75% of K-5 students will meet their individual learning targets in writing as measured by teacher/school created Pre/Post On-Demand Writing Assessments. 2018-19 CEP 19  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted?  Evidence-based instructional programs,  professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Professional Learning with ELA Vertical Team to begin Book Study- The Writing Revolution Administration/Teachers September 2018- June 2019 Collaborative Grade Team Inquiry led by Vertical Team members to plan lessons using The Writing Revolution Teachers September 2018-November 2018 Teachers/Literacy Coach October 2018; Administrators and Support Staff Administrators and Support Staff. Administrators and Support Staff Administrators, Support Staff and teachers. Teacher Teams; School Inquiry Team April 2019 October-November 2018/February 2019-April 2019 March 2019; May 2019 Intra Visitations within District Schools and Inter Visitations within our school building for sharing Best Practices in the Writing Workshop. Professional Learning to identify strategies and best practices to meet the needs of gaps identified from data from the Writing MOSL (BOY), Items Skill Analysis and Teacher created Pre/Post Writing Assessments Teachers Mid Year and End of Year sharing of Best Practices Teachers 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Teacher Teams will host monthly workshops for families during Parent Engagement Tuesdays to share trends and strategies that can be used at home to reinforce school instruction. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Teachers have been programmed for common prep periods within a week for discussion and inquiry. We use per diem funding to cover Teachers on inter-visitations to allow flexibility to visit classrooms to evaluate school instruction. 2018-19 CEP 20  Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Through effective, culturally respectful teacher collaboration, by February 2019, 60 % of K-5 students will meet their individual learning targets in writing as measured by two out of four teacher created On-Demand writing assessments. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. A review of class writing data (Pre/Post Assessments) and Inquiry work on a monthly basis. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 21  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Through data analysis of in house assessments, NYS test scores, MOSL, observations and survey results from the 2017-2018 school year, administration found a need to challenge our students to think critically. After reviewing results from Advance ratings teachers continue to struggle with relevant student engagement. It was noticed that our students perform well academically with procedural concepts while having difficulty with conceptual and critical thinking. By incorporating Collaborative Conversations into planning students will share ideas and thoughts promoting critical thinking. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. School leaders will support instruction by providing Professional Development opportunities and Common Planning time for teachers. As a result, 75% of grade 2 students will demonstrate proficiency in Common Core Learning Standards R.I2.3, RL.2.9 and NYS Next Generation Science Standards, as measured by benchmark assessments in Amplify Science. 2018-19 CEP 22  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs,  professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Professional Learning on Amplify Science by Administration and Grade Team Member who attended Summer PD Professional Learning to Review Collaborative Conversation Protocols and Incorporating Amplify Science Teachers Through focused classroom observations, Administration will analyze ADVANCE data around components 3B and 3C Teachers Revisions and feedback to staff about Collaborative Conversations Teachers Implementation of Amplify Science Exploratory Tasks. Teachers All Staff October 2018 Administration/Grade Team Members Administration and support staff Administration Administration and Support Staff Administration and Support Staff November 2018 On Going- Beginning November 2018- May 2019 On Going- Beginning November 2018- June 2019 On Going- Beginning November 2018- June 2019 Inter Visitations to classrooms demonstrating Best Practices. Implementation of Model Classrooms. Staff Administration/Literacy Coach On Going- Beginning December2018- June 2019 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Administration will discuss initiatives, systems and expectations with families during monthly Breakfast with the Principal. Key Staff will provide workshops during Parent Engagement Tuesdays. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment 2018-19 CEP 23  Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Teachers have at least 2 common prep periods for discussion, inquiry and meet with administration. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. School leaders will support instruction by providing Professional Development opportunities and Common Planning time for teachers. As a result, 60% of grade 2 students will demonstrate proficiency in Common Core Learning Standards R.I2.3, RL.2.9 and NYS Next Generation Science Standards, as measured by benchmark assessments in Amplify Science. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Advance ratings in 3B and 3C; Amplify Science End of Unit Tasks. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 24  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. To help our Parent Community which includes working parents, English Language Learner Parents and Parents of Students with Disabilities understand and support their child’s social and academic needs we need to increase their attendance and participation at school events with a focus on assisting parents on understanding the curriculum. This years data, according to NYC Survey results indicates that 91% of parents believe that the school creates a welcoming environment for families. However 87% of parents say that they would like teachers to communicate how families can help their child learn and work closely to meet their needs. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Through a collaborative partnership with parents during Tuesday Parent Engagement Workshops that provide strategies and assistance in parents understanding the curriculum will result in 70% of students in grades K-5 meeting their individual learning targets in ELA as measured by Running Records, teacher created writing assessments, MOSL Performance Assessments and NY State Assessments. 2018-19 CEP 25  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Translation of ALL documents going home to parents- Russian and Spanish. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? ALL Parents On Going September 2018 -June 2019 Teachers, Administrators, Parent Coordinator. Parent Survey to identify best times for parent attendance and needs ALL Parents Administrators, Parent Coordinator. October 2018 ALL Parents September 2018-June 2019 Teachers, Administrators, Parent Coordinator. Create events based on community needs, Chancellor Initiatives such as: Dads Take Your Child to School Day and Grandparents Day, Literacy Workshops, PBIS Workshops, Family Reading Night and PBL Celebrations. All to include translators where needed. The addition of monthly workshops held by teachers for the parents that will focus on homework, curriculum and meeting the needs of the children. Continue with monthly Breakfast With the Principal with translators. Continuation of ENL for Parent classes; In collaboration with our Mental Health Liaison we will Implement of Parent Workshops focused on Understanding IEP's; Behavior Strategies and Resources Available. Parents 3b – Parent and Family Engagement ALL Parents Monthly; Teachers, Administrators, Parent Coordinator. Parent Coordinator; Administration September 2018-June 2019 Monthly; October 2018-June 2019 If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. The Jewish Community Council of Greater Coney Island's Adult Literacy and Vocational Program. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 2018-19 CEP 26  Funding will be allocated for translation services for notices as well as oral translators. Funding will be allocated for Parent Involvement through refreshments and activities to bring in Parents and children for instructional and recreational activities. Funding will also be used for per session for staff to plan events. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A SIG X PTA Funded In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Through a collaborative partnership with parents during Tuesday Parent Engagement Workshops that provide strategies and assistance in parents understanding the curriculum will result in 50% of students in grades K-5 meeting their individual learning targets in ELA as measured by Running Records, teacher created writing assessments, MOSL Performance Assessments and NY State Assessments. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. A review of attendance and parent participation during the year, parent surveys, questions during breakfast with the principal. We will also analyze data through running records, pre/post assessments in writing and short responses to text based questions. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 27  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Review of State item analysis, classwork and performance tasks Mathematics Science Review of State item analysis, classwork and performance tasks Review of State scores, classwork and performance tasks Social Studies Review of classwork and performance tasks Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) The Early Childhood Intervention Specialist uses a language- based approach to reinforce work taught in reading, writing, math, S.S. and science. Students who are having difficulties in ELA also receive instruction during differentiated grouping Students who are having difficulties in Math receive remedial instruction during differentiated grouping Students who are having difficulties in Science receive remedial instruction (including guided reading on how to read informational texts) during differentiated grouping Students who are having difficulties in Social Studies receive remedial instruction (including guided Small group During the school day Small group During the school day Small group During the school day Small group During the school day 2018-19 CEP 28  At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Administration recommendation after review of classroom behavior reading on how to read informational texts) during differentiated grouping Students are identified by the school administration. Students in need of guidance meet with the guidance teacher once or twice a week Small group, 1:1 During the school day 2018-19 CEP 29  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. N/A Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). 27 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 CEP 30 Families will be provided with resources such as school supplies, books, intervention programs, individual and family counseling and any necessary transportation for family events. 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. 24,000 2018-19 CEP 31  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools X Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. N/A 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). N/A Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A 2018-19 CEP 32  Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). N/A 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. N/A 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Column B Verify with an (X) Section Reference(s) Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. 2018-19 CEP 33  Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 CEP 34  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. P.S. 100 The Coney Island School , in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Elementary and Secondary School (ESSA) Act, is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students [School name] will support parents and families of Title I students by: ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; 2018-19 CEP 35  ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; The school’s Parent Involvement Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; 2018-19 CEP 36  ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Elementary and Secondary School Act; ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) P.S. 100 The Coney Island School , in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Elementary and Secondary School (ESSA) Act, is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of 2018-19 CEP 37  student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Elementary and Secondary School (ESSA) Act; I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; 2018-19 CEP 38  ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Elementary and Secondary School Act Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; 2018-19 CEP 39  II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; III. Student Responsibilities 2018-19 CEP 40  ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 2018-19 CEP 41  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 2018-19 CEP 42  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: There are two classes for this program for our first and second grade students. One class will consist of 15 students who are at the Entering and Emerging proficiency levels on the NYSITELL and NYSELAT. There is a second class of 15 students who are at the Transitioning, Expanding and Commanding levels of proficiency according to the NYSITELL and NYSESLAT. The ELL After school program, "Orton-Gillingham" will provide a reinforcement of grade goals to support the students in First grade and second grade in their understanding of phonemic awareness and vocabulary skills. The program will focus on phonics and vocabulary to improve their reading comprehension. In reviewing the data and reviewing the EDAT report we noticed that our English Language Learners are in need of improvement in decoding and encoding skills which interrupts the understanding of academic language. There were 48 students who took the NYSESLAT 2018, in Kindergarten. Twelve percent of these students scored low in writing and 6 percent scored low in speaking. In the first grade there were 46 students that were administered the NYSESLAT exam 2018, 32 percent had low performance in writing and 8 percent had low performance in the speaking modality. This program will help reach our goals. We will use the Orton-Gillingham program to increase phonemic awareness and writing skills. We will focus on vocabulary, academic language and grammar to meet the Next Generation New York State Common Core State Standards. The program will run from January 10, 2018 to February 15, 2018, on Wednesday and Thursday afternoons (12 sessions), from 2:30 to 4:00 pm. In each class there will be a common branch teacher and the licensed ESL teacher, who will rotate in for collaborative teaching to address ESL methodologies in each class. In each class there will be approximately 10-15 students. Each class will service entering, emerging, transitioning and expanding students. There will be an evaluation after 6 weeks in order to progress monitor student achievement and ensure students are meeting the standards. The ELL program, "Orton-Gillingham"" will use English as the primary language of instruction. There are two classes for the "Creative Writing and Conventions". One class will consist of 12 students who have reached Entering and Emerging proficiency levels on the NYSITELL and NYSESLAT. The other class contains 15 students who have reached the Transitioning and Expanding levels on the NYSTILL and NYSESLAT. In addition, we will be offering assistance with a "Creative Writing and Conventions" program."The program will run from January 10, 2018 to February, 15 2018 (12 sessions) , Wednesday and Thursday, 2:30-4:00pm. This program will help prepare students with the writing process. According to our EDAT report, There were 32 students who were administered the 2018 NYSESLAT in grades 3, 4 and 5. There are 8 students noticed who entered PS 100 from a school outside of the United States in grades 3, 4, and 5 have little or no English language acquisition, this makes it difficult for them to excel on the writing modality. Therefore we are providing these students with a creative writing and conventions after school program. This program will help assist the "Newcomers" as well as the students who have been in the country 2018-19 CEP 43  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information less than 4 years, meet the New York State Common Core Standards. There will be 2 common branch teachers and a licensed ESL who will rotate through the classes in order to provide the students with ESL strategies and provide the teachers with the necessary tools to enhance their lessons. The ESL teacher will be able to answer questions, assist with reading directions, and writing skills. We are currently researching a program to meet the needs of our students. The program will be used to enhance our grammar skills This class will be taught in English. All materials for both programs will be supplemental from those used in daily instruction. Students will be invited to this program via paper notices with a tear off sheet for conformation. Notices will be sent home in English and parents preferred language. Attendance will be taken and all notices sent home will be on file in the main office. For the 2018-2019 school year we will continue to support our ELL population in grades 1 and 2 in developing their phonemic awareness skills using the Orton Gillingham approach in an after school program. The program will run 6-8 weeks, on Wednesday and Thursday afternoons from 2:30- 4:00pm, beginning in January. PS 100 will continue to support the ELL's in grades 3, 4 and 5 with a writing program to include grammar and writing conventions. This program will also run 6-8 weeks, Wednesday and Thursday afternoons from 2:30-4:00 pm, beginning in January. Both classes will be taught in English. All materials will be supplemental from those used in daily instruction. We will begin a "Parent and Me" Program beginning in October of 2018, during our allotted parent engagement time on Tuesday afternoons, in order for us to include our Kindergarten students. The ENL teacher's will hold workshops that will help the parents of our "Newcomers" along with all the parents in all grades of our English Language Learners to help families understand the curriculum. We will provide instruction to the parents on how to engage their children in learning through fun activities. We are conducting research into a family engagement program called " Academic Parent- Teacher Teams: Family Engagement= Student Success". Our goal is to develop a stronger partnership and build the student's academic success. Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: Then professional development plan will help focus on working with teachers to develop a scope of strategies to use with the ENL students to help build language, speaking, phonics and comprehension skills. The teachers serving the Title III Program will receive professional development throughout the course of the program. The teachers providing these workshops will receive professional development through the UFT Center Staff Developer, Angela Papadoupolous and the Orton-Gillingman Consultant, Sharon O'Neil. This will not infringe on the Title III budget.All records of attendance will be kept in a binder in the ELL Lab Coordinators offfice. Copies of the materials purchased will be kept in the main office. Topic 1: Introduction to Orton-Gillingham Rationale: To understand and use the program to help our students Date: January 10, 2018 and January 2019 Time: 3:30 pm Name of Provider: Lori Weiss, TESOL, LAB Coordinator 2018-19 CEP 44  Part C: Professional Development Audience: Teachers of "Orton-Gillingham" after school program. Topic 1: Introduction to the creative writing program. Rationale: To understand writing prompts on the NYSESLAT to help our students. Date: January 10, 2018 and January 2019 Time: 3:30 pm Name of Provider: Lori Weiss, TESOL, LAB Coordinator Topic 2: ENL Strategies to assist the Entering and Emerging students Rationale: How to engage the students and help them learn. Date: January 17, 2018 and January 2019 Time 3:30 -4:00 pm Name of Provider: Lori Weiss, TESOL, LAB Coordinator Audience: Teachers of the Entering and Emerging Students Topic 3: Moving Forward Rationale: How to expand/increase student’s vocabulary Date: January 25, 2018 and January 2019 Time 3:30 -4:00pm Name of Provider: Lori Weiss, TESOL, LAB Coordinator Audience: Teachers of Transitioning and Expanding students Topic 4: Review of Student Work Rationale: To review student work, Date: February 15, 2018 Time: Rotating times 2:30 -4:00pm Name of Provider: Chiara Spagnolo, Principal Audience: All teachers of the after school program. Other Professional Development will be provided as it is warranted throughout the duration of the program. Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: As part of the School year, we offer Parent Workshops on a wide variety of curriculum/grade pertinent topics to ensure parent understanding and support our academic goals. It is necessary for parents of ELL’s to understand student expectations. Parents will meet with the ESL teachers during the school year for workshops specific to the needs of this population, i.e. “Tips on How to help your English Language Learner at Home” and “Reading Together". Parents are notified about these meetings through translated letters/flyers and email blasts. The meetings are also posted on our monthly calendar that goes home as well. Interpreters are always available for assistance as well as on our school website.Topic 1: Orton- Gillingham Rationale: To review the Orton Gilingham program.Date: January 24, 2018 and January 2019Time: 3:30-4:00pmName of Provider: Lori Weiss, TESOL, LAB CoordinatorAudience: Parents of all students attending the afterschool program Topic 2: Expanding our Vocabulary Rationale: How can you help support 2018-19 CEP 45  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities your child and increase their vocabulary skillsDate: February 8, 2018 and February 2019Time: 3:30-4:00pmName of Provider: Chiara Spagnolo, Principal and Lori Weiss, TESOL LAB CoordinatorAudience: Parents of all StudentsTopic 3: Getting Ready for the NYSESLATRationale: Preparing our students for the NYSESLATDate: February 15, 2018 and February 2019Time: 3:30-4:00pmName of Provider: Chiara Spagnolo, Principal and Lori Weiss, TESOL LAB CoordinatorAudience: Parents of all students attending the after school programDate: Time: 9:00amThere will be other workshops through out the year.Attendance and agendas will be kept in the principals office. These are at no cost to Title III Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount 12 weeks, 6 teachers, 1 1/2 hours per day, 2 days per week=$994.00 $828 per week x 12 weeks = $11930.00 12 weeks, 6 teachers, 1 1/2 hours per day, 2 days per week=$994. $828 per week x 12 weeks = $11930.00 To be researched Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. "Orton-Gillingham"-3 teachers a day 2 days a week 'Creative Writing" - 2 teachers a day 2 days a week. 1 ESL teacher to rotate among classes. for 12 weeks Orton-Gillingham"-3 teachers a day 2 days a week 'Creative Writing" - 2 teachers a day 2 days a week. 1 ESL teacher to rotate among classes. for 12 weeks Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits)  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL To be researched 2018-19 CEP 46  2018-19 CEP 47  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 21 School Name The Coney Island School Borough Brooklyn School Number 100 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Chiara Spagnolo Coach Angela Papadoupolos ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Lori Weiss Teacher/Subject Area Elena Fallon/Grade 1 Teacher/Subject Area Shirley Scherman/ENL Related-Service Provider Lauren Russo/Speech Superintendent Isabel DiMola Assistant Principal Susan Mazzeo Coach N/A School Counselor Carmen Serrano Parent Yelena Haneyk Parent Coordinator Lucy Malave Field Support Center Staff Member Ronny Rodriguez Other (Name and Title) N/A C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 3 3 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 784 2018-19 CEP 48 Total number of ELLs 185 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 23.60%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Opened (e.g., 2013-14) PrograLangm TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL . N/A K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A PS 100 uses Fountas and Pinnell to assess early literacy skills of our ENL students. This tool gives valuable insight into ENL’s phonemic awareness, phonics, reading and writing skills. From Fountas and Pinnell, ENL teachers as well as classroom teachers pinpoint areas of weakness and strengths. For example, ENL teachers and classroom teachers are working with students on short vowel sounds which seem to be a problematic area for a lot of our students. Teachers can address these weaknesses Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 98 2018-19 CEP 49  during differentiated instruction.Fountas and Pinnell are able to provide us with valuable data about of ELL students. As a school we are able to develop an instructional plan to meet the needs of our students. In looking at the students’ data we notice that our students who have reached the Entering and emerging proficiency levels are in need of instruction in phonemic awareness and comprehension skills. This information helps the teachers (ENL and Classroom teachers) plan for whole group and differentiated instruction. Whereas our ENL students who have reached the transitioning and expanding proficiency levels are in need of instruction with fluency, comprehension, miscues and self-corrections. Teachers in grades 3 -5 will use the Item Analysis Report for the New York State Common Core Exams is used to guide instructional planning for our ELL students. Total 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 98 98 Part III: Assessment Analysis After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? Teachers of ELL’s along with the classroom teachers will use the data from Fountas and Pinnell to organize guided reading groups as well as writing groups to promote effective behaviors for our students to become proficient readers. Through guided reading we are promoting best practice for reading behaviors, creating groups and aligning group strategies to meet the needs of all learners. In grades 3-5 teachers use the New York State Common Core Exams Item Analysis report to create meaningful lessons. Teachers will use the item analysis report to develop an increased depth in analysis of text. This will enable the students to move towards insightful analysis of various aspects of complex texts, guide item development and ensure students are meeting the Common Core State Standards. 2018-19 CEP 50  2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? ENL teachers as well as classroom teachers review the results of the Measures of Student Learning to assess the progress during the school year as well as Fountas and Pinnell to analyze student’s strengths and identify where they need teaching support in different instructional contexts. To evaluate the success of our programs for ENL’s we look at the data to find the weakness and strengths. We look at our student’s progress to determine the value of keeping what works for our ELL population. Pre-assessments and post-assessments designed and aligned to the Next Generation Common Core Standards and used to design lessons and differentiate to meet the needs and utilize various UDL strategies to ensure the success of all learners in reading and writing. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? Once the needs are identified the ENL support integrates intervention into the ENL design. Push-in support integrates ENL strategies into lessons driven from the content. For this to happen, there is a close working relationship between the classroom teacher and the ENL teacher where a combination of co-teaching and parallel teaching is taking place within the classroom. Stand-alone teachers who work with Entering and Emerging students target specific language needs related to speaking, reading, listening and writing such as grammar and phonological awareness. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? In order for our school to guide instruction for ENL’s within the response to RTI is as follows: We will look at baseline assessments as their universal screening to help teachers make instructional decisions. We will examine achievement in the classroom, analyze data, design and implement targeted supplemental supports. We will monitor progress over time and plan for mid course corrections. Students will be evaluated for Special Education when they are not responding to rigorous instruction, along with instruction being provided with increasing intensity. The family of these students will be contacted throughout the process to foster a partnership to achieve success. RTI instruction for ELL’s in language development is provided by our ELL teachers at the Tier I instructional level. Students who are identified as struggling students move into Tiers 2 and 3 for a more targeted and intensive support. This support is provided by our reading specialist using a pull-out push in program. This program will use specific instruction to target deficits. The reading specialist will use activities targeted to meet the needs of the students. If a student is in need of Tier 3 intervention will include intensive 1:1 instruction. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] The data patterns across performance levels on the NYSITELL and NYSESLAT reveal that our students are in need of improvement with their writing skills. Our students who reached the transitioning and expanding proficiencies are able to read passages on grade level but struggle with higher order thinking. They are still having difficulties learning structure and grammar of the English Language. Students are unable to decipher questions which include figurative language. This year we will increase instruction to include grammar, usage and mechanics. New comers struggle with the rules of phonics and vocabulary. The ENL and classroom teachers will increase instruction to include rigorous lessons in phonemic awareness. We began the Orton Gillingham program in the fall of 2017 for our kindergarten and first grade students to increase the student's phonemic awareness and skills. We are expanding this program to our second grade starting in the fall of 2018. This fall we tested 100 students using the NYSITELL exam in grades K-5. Forty five students achieved proficiency levels. Twenty six students reached Entering proficiency level, 5 students reached Emerging proficiency level, 9 students achieved Transitioning level and 4 students reached Expanding proficiency levels. In the spring of 2017 the ENL students were tested with the NYSESLAT. The results are as follows: 2 students are at the Entering proficiency level, 7 students are at the Emerging proficiency level, 25 students are at the Transitioning proficiency level, 42 students reached Expanding proficiencies and 31 students have reached Commanding status. The English Language Learners were administered the New York State English Language Arts Exam in the Spring of 2017. There were thirteen ELL students scored at a level 1, eight ELL students scored at a level 2, four students scored at a level 3 and one student scored at a level4. Seven students were exempt from the ELA due to their newly enrolled status to the United States. The scores for the ELL students who were administered the New York State Math Exam are as follows: eleven students scored at level 1, nine students scored at a level 2, nine students scored at a level 3 and four students scored at a level 4 in grades 3-5. 2018-19 CEP 51  6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. When the results of the NYSITELL and NYSESLAT are calculated the ELL LAB Coordinator meets with the ELL teachers and classroom teachers to devise a plan of action in order for the students to receive the prescribed mandated allotment of service according to the CR-154.2. The students will then be programmed in STARS. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? 1. Instruction for ELL’s at PS100 provides instruction in English with home language support. ENL is delivered by a certified ENL teacher along with the students classroom teacher. We build English language skills through content area instruction using the push in /pull out methodologies. Students in kindergarten are grouped by level of proficiency using both integrated and standalone ENL instruction. The students in first and second grade who have reached the Entering and Emerging proficiency levels are grouped together for instruction. The students in second grade that have achieved Transitioning, Expanding and Commanding proficiency levels are grouped together using the standalone methodology. The Entering and Emerging receive ENL instruction using the standalone method and the Transitioning and Expanding group also receives instruction through the standalone method. The students in Special Education and General Education who are ELL's in grades one through four receive instruction through both integrated and standalone methods of instruction. All general education classes are heterogeneously grouped. This allows for differentiated instruction and grouping. Period 4 Group A push-in Group O pull out Group B push in Group C push in Group D push in Group D push in Groups G,O pull out Groups G,O pull out Group B push in Group E push in Group E push in Group F push in Groups G, O pull out 2018-19 CEP 52  Groups G, O pull out Group B push in Group A push in Group C push in Group F push in Group E push in Group E push in Group B push in Group C push in Group F push in Group F push in Group D push in Group D push in Group O pull out Group C push in Group H push in Group H push in Group I push in Groups I push in Group J push in Group J push in Group K push in Group K push in Group L push in Group N push in Group N 2018-19 CEP 53  push in Group H push in Group H push in Group M push in Group M Push in Group L push in Group L push in Group K Push In Group K push in Group I Push in Group I push in Group J push in Group J push in Group M push in Group M push in Group A push in Group A push in Group N push in Group N push in Group A push in Group A push in Lunch Duty Group G pull out Group E push in Group E push in 2018-19 CEP 54  Groups B push in Group C pull out Group D push in Group F push in Group F push in Group G pull out Group B push in Group C Pull out Group D Push in Group H Push in Group H Push in Group C Pull out Group H Push in Group H Push in Group B push in Group B Push in Group G Pull out Group D Push in Group D Push in Group C Pull out Group G Pull out Group E Push in Group E Push in Part IV: ELL Programming 2018-19 CEP 55  Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. N/A b. TBE program. If applicable. N/A c. DL program. If applicable. The school ensures that the mandated number of instructional minutes are provided according to the proficiency levels in each program. The students who reached Entering and Expanding proficiency levels receive 360 minutes of instruction per week, to include 180 minutes of ENL instruction and 180 minutes of ENL/ELA instruction. The students who reached the transitioning and expanding levels of proficiency receive 180 minutes of ENL instruction per week. This is to include 90 minutes of ENL instruction and 90 minutes of ENL/ELA instruction. The students who reached the Commanding level receive 90 minutes of ENL support per week. The ELL teachers work with the classroom teachers to ensure all students needs are being met. 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? All ENL classes are conducted in English with Native Language support from our bilingual paraprofessionals as well as some of our teachers and staff who are bilingual in the languages of our students. Content areas are delivered through group instruction using ENL methodologies providing strategies for comprehension .The English Language Learners at PS100 are supported with weekly lessons that scaffold comprehension instruction and vocabulary development. The ENL instructors will activate prior knowledge and build background. The ENL teachers provide picture cards and use the TPR (Total Physical Response) method to engage in active learning as well as using iPads in the classroom. Together the ENL teacher along with the classroom teachers foster language development to meet the demands of the Common Core Standards. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. To ensure that our ELL’s are appropriately evaluated in their native languages bilingual dictionaries are provided as well as reading books that are translated into Spanish and Russian PS 100’s primary languages. The New York State Math Exam is provided in their native language. The New York State Science Exam is orally translated by one of our Bilingual pedagogues. Some of the instructional materials in our reading program are translated into languages other than English which in turn not only supports the student but their families as well. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? a. At this time, PS 100 does not have any SIFE students. The SIFE students at PS100 would be supported by our SETSS teacher in addition to receiving the prescribed mandated services as per CR 154 by the ESL teacher. The SETSS teacher pushes into the classroom during the day to increase academic gains. SIFE students would participate in small group instruction with the ENL teacher to increase academic rigor. SIFE student would be paired with peer tutors. Instructional objectives for all students are constantly changing due to the progression of academic knowledge; differentiated instruction is taking place on a daily basis according to topics being covered. b. Students who are enrolled at our school for less than three years as well as students who are new to the country and the English language are engage in lessons that will immerse them in social and academic language using pictures, tactile objects, visual cues and audio support. The newcomers at PS 100 will have extra support to work on their phonological awareness skills 2018-19 CEP 56  to enhance their academic performance to meet all of the Next Generation Common Core State Standards. Teachers of both newcomers are encouraged to go on class trips to enhance social and academic language while giving them meaningful and rich life experiences. The use of laptops and iPads in classroom aids in supporting our newcomers and ENL’s enrolled for less than three years. For those newcomers and ENL’s enrolled for less than three years in the Early Childhood Grades will have additional support by the Literacy teacher. The Literacy teacher pushes into the Early Childhood grades to enhance their reading and grammar skills. Newcomers and ENL’s enrolled less than three years are also supported by peers with in the classroom who aid in interpreters and translators. c. The ENL and classroom teachers will look closely NYSESLAT scores, State Reading Exams, and Periodic Assessments to devise a plan for our ENL’s who are enrolled at our school for 4 to 6 years. The teachers will work closely to plan lessons in order to increase their academic rigor and achieve goals set by both ELL teacher and classroom teacher. Together they plan during common preparation periods to develop Reading, Math, Science, Social Studies lessons as well as appropriate homework assignments. The ENL teacher will look at pacing calendars in order to develop lessons that align with classroom lessons as well as to meet with the Next Generation Common Core Standards. These students are encouraged to participate in read-alouds, collaborative conversations/ Socratic circles, shared and guided reading as well as the writer’s workshop model. d. At this time we do not have any long term ENL’s. The long term ENL’s at PS100 would be supported by our SETSS teacher as well as the ENL teacher. The SETTS teacher would push into the classroom during the day to increase academic gains. Long term ELL’s participate in small group instruction with the ENL teacher to increase academic rigor. Long term ENL’s will be paired with peer tutors. Instructional objectives for all students are constantly changing due to the progression of academic knowledge; differentiated instruction is taking place on a daily basis according to topics being covered. e. Former ENL’s will continue to receive support from ENL teachers 90 minutes per week according to the CR154-2 from the ENL teachers as well as the classroom teachers for two years after reaching commanding proficiency status. These students receive time and a half on all state exams as well as given extra time on all classroom exams. The classroom teachers are supported by the ENL teachers with workshops and guidance to ensure academic rigor is being provided for these students. Together classroom teachers and ENL teachers will develop lessons to meet the needs of students who have reached proficiency levels on the NYSESLAT. Transitional support for our ELL’s that have reached proficiency on the NYSESLAT will be addressed through differentiated instruction. Students will be grouped together during classroom time to work on the necessary interventions to achieve instructional goals. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status The ENL students who are also Special Education students are in need of other interventions as well as ENL services. The service providers such as, Speech Therapists, Physical Therapists, Occupational Therapists, Guidance Counselors, SETTS and ENL teachers have a meeting to devise a plan to best meet the needs of the students.We supply many materials that are grade and age appropriate. Within the classrooms of ELLs and ELL-SWD’s, technology is large components in helping our students’ achieve success. Students’ are supplied with ipads and lessons include visuals with the help of Smartboard Technologies. Libraries in the classroom are not only leveled to meet the needs of our students, we supply a various amount of bilingual books to promote the use of the home language. Manipulatives and visual aids are used in many lessons to give students the ability to see and touch. This allows the students the opportunity to learn in ways that is right for them. All materials used in the classrooms are there to accelerate English language acquisition. Bilingual glossaries are supplied to the students and grades 3, 4 and 5. Regardless of SWD status all ELL students are provided with the mandated units of ENL service. The ELL teachers are involved in the development of student’s goals on an IEP. The ELL teachers’ meet with the Special Education teachers to discuss instructional goals for our students. The ELL teachers run the RLAT on ATS to discover who is entitled to receive ESL services. The ENL teachers review the IEP’s of the SWD’s to determine if bilingual instruction is being implemented and that the student is in the correct program. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? 2018-19 CEP 57  The ENL teachers will push into the classroom during reading and math periods to support academic instruction. The other therapists use both the Push-In/ Pull-Out method in order to have the least amount disruption during instructional time. ENL methodologies are implemented within all classroom instruction to support the ENL students. We engage our ENL-SWD students with hands on experiences. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? The targeted intervention programs are built into our reading and math lessons and are utilized within the classroom. PS 100 is using Journeys, ReadyGen and many other resources to promote critical thinking to engage our learners in collaborative conversations. Through Collaborative Conversations we are preparing our diverse students to meet the Next Generation Standards. This will help our ENL students gain equal access in meeting those standards. The classroom teachers along with the ENL teachers develop effective lesson plans for the ENL student. We use multiple resources to include vocabulary word cards to extend language activities. This is targeted to stimulate language production and reinforce target vocabulary. Small group activities to include word cards to practice listening, speaking, reading and writing. This is helpful for our students who are at the entering and emerging levels as well as our transitioning and expanding students.The teachers will use visual cues and translators to target students who are at the entering and emerging levels. The teachers support every ENL student and scaffold instruction to help students understand and respond to literature. PS 100 is using GO MATH!, Exemplars and Math strategies from Generation Next to guide our students in learning and meeting the Next Generation Common Core math standards. These resources will help students achieve fluency, speed and confidence within each grade level. Lessons are designed to help with key vocabulary needed to gain information, develop their communication skills, and develop higher order thinking and problem solving skills.This will help with the ESL students at all proficiency levels. The lessons engage the students in interactive digital manipulatives using the Smart Board along with having Write-On /Wipe-Off Math Boards to help students organize their thinking with visual models and graphic organizers. All classes are conducted in English. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. Based on our data we began using the Orton-Gillingham approach to support students of all levels in building phonemic and phonological awareness. This approach supports students through the implementation of auditory drills for different consonant-vowel sounds as well as blends and digraphs, which can be connected to decoding strategies for reading. It also focuses on word patterns in the English language such as word endings. The approach connects visual, auditory and tactile-kinesthetic senses to support all learning styles. We find that our students are having difficulties with phonemic and phonological awareness. Most of the students in our school although may not be in the ENL program are from homes where English is not the primary language spoken. Math Exemplars will also be purchased to increase our students ability to problem solve and develop critical thinking skills. This program provides teachers a collection of planning, instruction, and an assessment tool. Differentiated problems will explore math concepts and skills students are having difficulties with and learn alternative strategies for solving tasks. In looking at our "In House Spring Assessments" we noticed that our kindergarten ENL students made gains in their writing and phonemic awareness skills. We are now adding the Orton Gillingham program into our second grade curriculum. Each year we would like to add the Orton Gillingham approach to the next grade. We are also looking to improve parent collaboration with our new comers and will hold parent workshops during our parent engagement allotted time to help our new immigrants. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? We do not have a bilingual program in our school. After NYSITELL testing is complete and the Parent Orientation is conducted we review all Parent Survey and Selection forms. According to the forms the response of the parents has always been to have classes conducted in English only. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? Our ENL students have an opportunity to participate in our Arts and Media Program. This will encompass different learning styles, which includes instructional activities that support the individual student’s visual, auditory and tactile style of learning. Our ENL’s are given the opportunity to hear, see, and interact with Smart Boards. This gives the ENL’s the opportunity to 2018-19 CEP 58  encompass the total physical response approach to enhance real life pictures and seeing objects and places they would have never been given the opportunity to experience before. In this school, we are fortunate to have rolling computer carts for each floor of the building. Each rolling cart holds twenty eight laptops that the students have access to. Additional programs are offered at PS100 for our ENL population through Title III funding. PS 100 provide an after school program targeting our third, fourth and fifth grade students to increase their writing skills. This program will help prepare our ENL’s on all state exams. We also had a Phonics A-Z after school program for ELL students in first and second grade. Aside from our after school program for our ENL’s the students participate in our music and arts program. Each class kindergarten through fifth grade, including our Special Education students participate in project based learning projects throughout the year. Project based Learning prepares our ENL students for academic and personal success. The PBL helps demonstrate what they know and work with other students to increase their communication skills. These projects help build confidence in our students who are in the early stages of language development. PS100 also participates in a city wide competition of Ballroom dancing, where many of our fourth grade ENL students participate. All students and parents receive invitations to participate in all after school activities. Information is sent home in their backpacks in parents preferred language. The ELL population is represented in these programs because they include structured immersion. Our goal is to teach English language learners both English language and academic content. Teachers use a variety of strategies – such as the use of gestures, visual aids, and simplified English in order for students’ to be able access content.. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. This year at PS100 we are looking closely at our instructional goals to increase academic rigor. We are developing in our lesson plans rigorous and meaningful academic goals to improve student performance. We are working on lessons to align content and performance with the Next Generation Common Core Standards as well as looking across the curriculum and developing higher order thinking skills, practices and questioning for our ENL students. In order for our students to make progress, one of our goals is to develop a deep understanding of student needs through classroom assessment and professional inquiry that will be shared by both classroom teacher and the teachers of our ENL students. The ENL teacher’s roles at PS100 will be to develop the skills needed to show academic gains, the ENL teacher includes lessons that will increase their oral language development. A Holistic Approach is used where the four skills of listening, speaking, reading and writing are included every day. The ENL teachers will continue to use to a variety of resources. The ENL teachers are using the Orton Gillingham approach to teach phonics using interactive and engaging materials. This approach is being implemented throughout the grades for our ENL students. This year we will continue to use the program, Reading Express , this program proved to be useful in grades 3, 4 and 5. This program includes lessons that target vocabulary and literacy skills that allow our ENL’s to meet the Next Generation Common Core Standards. This program allows for differentiated instruction. In our Special Education programs and for our ENL students, iPads have been purchased for the students to have hands on experiences at their fingertips. This will assist in developing their vocabulary skills. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. Native language is supported through bilingual libraries in the classrooms. There are books and videos in different languages spoken at our school. We encourage students to borrow materials to work at home with their families. We have fiction and non-fiction books written in Russian/ English and Spanish/English, the main languages of our students. We also have bilingual dictionaries to help the children. On our staff, we have several teachers who are fluent in Russian, Spanish, Urdu, Polish and Arabic. We also have an active PTA with many parents volunteering as interpreters. We do not have a transitional Bilingual Program or a Dual Language program at this time. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? At PS 100 we ensure that all required services and resources support and correspond to ELL’s ages and grade levels by conferencing with parents at the time of enrollment. During the interview process the ENL teacher will conduct and interview and discuss their educational background. The ENL teacher will then review findings with the classroom teacher to ensure proper materials are available to support the student.To create ELL content-area performance goals that are both meaningful and challenging, expectations for ELL content area progress reflects the developmental nature of ELLs’ English language acquisition and its role in their acquisition of grade-level content knowledge in English. At PS 100, we meet the needs of our 2018-19 CEP 59  ELL’s of all grade levels and ages using the Next Generation Common Core State Standards. We develop and administer assessments that are aligned and correspond to academic achievement standards which allow us to measure growth. We modify lessons for ELL population in order to meet academic demands. For example, ELL’s are asked to meet grade appropriate standards in literacy. To achieve this teachers scaffold techniques to ensure that the content is delivered in a way that the second language is comprehensible for ELL’s at all levels of English Proficiency. Teachers help the ELL student develop their academic language using multiple pathways for acquiring grade level content, knowledge and skills. All ELL-SWD’s are provided with services and resources that are appropriate to meet their cognitive needs. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. PS 100 shares our school with PS370 a District 75 school. At this time they do not have any ENL students. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? We offer a tour of the kindergarten classrooms when newly enrolled students come to register at PS100. All of the newly enrolled students are greeted by one of our ENL teachers. The teachers talk to the families and explain procedures through out the building. A tour is given to the family either by the ESL teachers or the family assistant. This activity is done before the beginning of the school year as well as new registrants who enroll in our school throughout the year. For the older students we pair them with another student who can act as a buddy/translator. This will help the newcomer adjust and feel welcomed to their new surroundings. Students participate in all activities.The school guidance counselor assists the students as needed as well as guide the fifth graders through the middle school application process. The parent coordinator along with the ESL teachers are available through out the year to assist students and their families. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). PS100 does not offer language electives. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? N/A 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? The ELL staff members attend all professional development that is available within our school building. Professional development workshops are conducted during common preparation times throughout the school year. The ENL teachers also attend workshops given through through the Brooklyn South Field Support Center with the ESL Instructional Support Specialists. Our ENL Instructional Support Specialist, will visit during the school year to conduct Professional Development not only with the ENL personnel, it is open to the entire staff to attend. The ENL teachers and staff will also participate in the Professional Development held on Election Day as well as Brooklyn Day. At PS100 we provide professional development to all teachers and administration that specifically address the needs of English Language Learner’s. The tentative Professional Development Schedule at PS 100 for the 2018-2019 is as follows: In September, the topics will be: 2018-19 CEP 60  *September: * "Language Objectives: Lori Weiss TESOL (Facilitator) Participating Staff: K-5 Teachers Goals: To review/ discuss the anchor standards for language and how to adapt them to meet the needs od the ENL students. * UDL Strategies: C. Spagnolo, Principal, L. Weiss TESOL, (Facilitators )Participating Staff: K-5 Teachers Goals: to review/ discuss UDL strategies to meet the needs of all students October: * IEP/ Special Education Meeting : T. Metullus, Sped Teacher, (Facilitator) Participating Staff: Teachers K-5 Goals To review/ discuss IEP protocols * Enrichment Cycles and Project Based Learning: C. Spagnolo, Principal (Facilitator) Participating Staff: K-5 Teachers Goals: To discuss Project Based Learning to be done during our Enrichment Cycles. * Report Cards: Grade Leaders (Facilitators) Participating Staff; K-5 Teachers Goals: To effectively plan for parent teacher conferences and report grades. *Important School Matters, C. Spagnolo, Principal (Facilitator) Participating Staff: Participating Staff: Teachers K-5, November: *Team Protocols and Expectations, C. Spagnolo, Principal, Lori Weiss, TESOL (Facilitators) Participating Staff: Teachers K-5 Goals: meeting the needs of our diverse learners.* Resources to support students to include our ELL’s and SWD’s A.Papadopoulos, UFT Center Trainer, teacher (facilitator) All Staff including Paraprofessionals, Guidance Counselor, Special Education Teachers, Clusters, and Speech Therapists*Collaborative Teaching, C. Spagnolo Principal, L. Weiss, TESOL (facilitators),Participating Staff: ALL STAFF including, Paraprofessionals, Guidance Counselor, Special Education Teachers, Clusters, and Speech Therapists Goals: To develop lessons to encompass collaborative teaching. December *To Review And Analyze Data, C. Spagnolo, Principal, S. Mazzeo, Assistant Principal (facilitators) ALL STAFF including Paraprofessionals, Guidance Counselor, Special Education Teachers, Clusters, and Speech Therapists Goals: To analyze data and effective planning.* ELL Progressions, Lori Weiss, TESOL (Facilitator) Participating Staff, including Paraprofessionals, Guidance Counselor, Special Education Teachers, Clusters, and Speech Therapists Goals: To review ELL Progressions according to the NYSCCLS*Autism Workshop, N. Polanco, Special Education Teacher, T. Mettelus, Special Education Teacher (facilitators) Participating Staff: Grades K-2, ELL Teachers and Special ED. Teachers Goals: Insight in teaching our Autistic population January*Inquiry Planning: Grade Leaders (facilitator) Participating Staff: Teachers K-5 Goals: To analyze data/ plan instructional strategies. *Miscues and Guided Reading; S. Corso, First Grade Teacher, L. Weiss, TESOL (Facilitators) Participating Staff: K-5 Teachers Goals: Review of miscues/strategies to help students to move from level to level. February *Support Critical Thinking: C. Spagnolo, Principal, L. Weiss, TESOL, (Facilitators) Participating Staff: All Staff including Paraprofessionals, Guidance Counselor, Special Education Teachers, Clusters, and Speech Therapists Goals: To deepen our understanding of Critical Thinking*Inquiry Staff: Vertical teams Goals: Inquiry Teams will share their challenges, successes and what they would do differently moving into the next cycle.March *SPED/ ELL Topics T. Metelus, Sped. Teacher, L.Weiss,TESOL (facilitators) Participating Staff: All STAFF including Paraprofessionals, Guidance Counselor, Special Education Teachers, Clusters, and Speech Therapists *Testing Information Session, M. Mazzeo, Testing Coordinator(Facilitator) Participating 2018-19 CEP 61  Staff: All Staff including Paraprofessionals, Guidance Counselor, Special Education Teachers, Clusters, and Speech Therapists Goals: Review of testing procedures and protocols to include the ELLS and SWD's. April *Inquiry Planning, Grade Leaders (Facilitators) Participating Staff: ALL STAFF, including Paraprofessionals, Guidance Counselor, Special Education Teachers, Clusters, and Speech Therapists Goals: Unit Planning/ adjustments and planning.*RtI: Brainstorming of Interventions : Alignment of Problems L. Weiss, TESOL, Participating Staff: All Staff including Paraprofessionals, Guidance Counselor, Special Education Teachers, Clusters, and Speech Therapists Goals: To understand the difference between language development and learning disability. May *Inter-visitations L. Buchbinder,Teacher,L. Weiss TESOL (facilitators) ALL STAFF, including Paraprofessionals, Guidance Counselor, Special Education Teachers, Clusters, and Speech Therapists Goals: Gathering information from other grades to collaborate using different teaching strategies. *ESL (Language or Disability) Part II L. Weiss, TESOL,S. Scherman, TESOL Participating Staff: ALL STAFF, including Paraprofessionals, Guidance Counselor, Special Education Teachers, Clusters, and Speech Therapists Goal: To deepen pur understanding of language abilities. *MOSL Information,C. Spagnolo, Principal, J. Brenner, Testing Coordinator (facilitators) Participating Staff: ALL STAFF, including Paraprofessionals, Guidance Counselor, Special Education Teachers, Clusters, and Speech Therapists Goals: Updates and information about MOSL/Data *Inquiry and Common Planning Participating Staff: ALL STAFF, including Paraprofessionals, Guidance Counselor, Special Education Teachers, Clusters, and Speech Therapists Goals: Using data to inform instruction, adjustments and planning. Cathy Eberle, our school Secretary is on the executive board of the National Association of Educational Office Professionals, and attends monthly meetings that she conducts or is a participant of and then will turnkey to other staff members in the building. The Speech, Occupational and Physical Therapists, and the School Psychologist, attend monthly staff development workshops outside of our building. The Parent Coordinator attends staff development outside of the building as well as provides workshops for parents on a monthly basis. Professional development for all staff members including the ENL teachers is ongoing throughout the year as we support our ENL’s as they engage in learning the Next Generation Common Core Learning Standards. The professional development is held every Monday afternoon. The staff will work together in developing rigorous lessons that will help the ENL’s develop the necessary tools to meet the Next Generation Common Core Learning Standards. Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? Our school is able to meet the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2 by participating in workshops dedicated to language acquisition. This will include a focus on best practices for co-teaching strategies and integrating language and content instruction for English Language Learners. For all new English as a New Language teachers a minimum of fifty percent of the required professional development hours will be dedicated to language acquisition in alignment with the 2018-19 CEP 62  content area instruction. Our staff members will participate in ongoing staff development workshops. The workshops will be conducted throughout the year to include issues regarding how The English Language Learners can meet the Common Core Standards. The ELL Instructional Support Specialist at PS100 will work closely with school-based staff to create and conduct interactive workshops. These workshops will be held during grade meetings. The teacher workshops will include: Welcoming the New English Language Learner to your classroom; Planning lessons to include the English Language Learner in meeting Common Core Standards; ESL content areas and provide academic rigor; What types of questions can I ask to increase academic rigor for our ENL students; Writer’s workshop for your ENL students; How do we get our ENL’s to understand mathematical word problems; Planning lessons for the older ENL student; NYS testing mandates for ENL’s and Planning for next year are some of the workshops that will be held this year for teachers. The ENL teachers will participate in upcoming workshops the UFT office is providing as well as workshops throughout the year offered by the Offices of English Language Learners. The LAB Coordinator attended workshops through Showcase Schools on guided reading practices, as well as workshops on Co-Teaching through the Brooklyn South Office. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. The school provides annual individual meetings with parents of ELL’s to discuss goals of the program, language development progress,language proficiency results, and language development needs in all content areas throughout the year. Tuesday afternoons are allocated for parent meetings with classroom and ENL teachers to discuss student progress with parents and guardians. Parents are made aware that the ENL teachers are here not only to support the student but to support the parent as well. Every effort is made to ensure the success of a student and this is achieved through open communication between parent and teacher. We are also supported by staff who serve as interpreters. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? ELL parents take an active roll in our school. We have a very involved PTA, which parents volunteer for book fairs and bake sales. They are always around to lend a helping hand. PTA parents serve as translators and interpreters as well. . Once a month Ms. Spagnolo, Principal of PS 100, holds a “Breakfast with the Principal”. Parents of all students are invited to join Ms. Spagnolo as she discusses exiting new things going on at our school. She also has time allotted for parents to voice any questions or concerns they may have. A monthly calendar is sent home with all upcoming events. All parents are welcomed to join the school’s Leadership Team, which also meets once a month. Our Parent Coordinator is very busy this year getting parents involved in school activities. Ms. Malave was able to coordinate an ESL class for our parents and members of the community. This Adult ESL Program for adults was funded by the Jewish Community Council of Greater Coney Island. We are fortunate that this program will continue for the next school year (2018-2019). ESL parents take part in workshops given by the ESL teachers through out the year. At PS 100 we offer a few family days through out the year that ESL parents are encouraged to participate. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. N/A Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Chiara Spagnolo 2018-19 CEP 63  2018-19 CEP 64 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, 100, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 CEP 65  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: 21k100 School DBN: Chiara Spagnolo Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) 6/25/18 6/25/18 6/25/18 6/25/18 6/25/18 N/A 6/25/18 6/25/18 6/25/18 N/A 6/25/18 Title Principal Assistant Principal Parent Coordinator ENL/Bilingual Teacher Parent Teacher/Subject Area Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach School Counselor Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member 6/25/18 First grade teacher Other 6/25/18 ENL Teacher Other 6/25/18 Speech Therapist Other 6/25/18 Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) Susan Mazzeo Lucy Malave Lori Weiss Yelena Haneyk N/A N/A Angela Papadopolous N/A N/A Isabel DiMola Ronny Rodriguez Elena Fallon Schirley Scherman Lauren Russo 1/1/01 2018-19 CEP 66  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 21K100 School Name: The Coney Island School Superintendent: Isabel DiMola The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Lucy Malave Parent Coordinator yes yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. An annual review of the Parent Selection and Program Survey and the Continuation of Service forms are used to assess PS 100’s need for written translations and/or oral interpretations along with interviewing all children with a dual language background. In addition, the staff will review Language Survey forms to see which languages are prevalent in the building. Student emergency contact cards are offered in English, Spanish and Russian and then are translated as needed by our bilingual staff. The school notices (i.e. half day notices, school closings, trip forms) are being translated into Russian and Spanish, the two major languages of our school. Although, we have many languages spoken at PS 100 such as Uzbek and Georgian most of the parents are able to read in Russian. As for our families that speak Urdu, we are fortunate to have staff members who speak, read and write in Urdu to assist in any translations and interpretations. There is also a need for oral interpretation when a parent needs to be called. Notices and consent forms were not responded to and poor participation by parents led to letters being translated into the different languages. Teachers and parents were informed of written translation and oral needs at PTA meetings, faculty conference and at School Leadership meetings. 2018-19 CEP 67  2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral English Russian Spanish Urdu 1037 157 14 5 84.86 12.85 1.15 .41 1018 169 15 11 83.31 13.83 1.23 .09 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. N/A Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. PS 100 will send many documents throughout the year. The parents who require Language Translations will receive the documents in their preferred language. These documents include educational programs such as after school. Title III programs, school calendars and testing information. Parent-Teacher conferences announcements as well as ELL Parent Workshops are also translated in parent's preferred languages. We have many interpreters on staff to provide additional assistance when needed. -After school beginning of school year. Workshops- 2 weeks notice with weekly reminders Translators in our building. Documents will be sent to the Translation and Interpretation Unit, if we are unable to translate within our school building. School Calendar - School calendar: beginning of each month Translators in our building. Documents will be sent to the Translation and Interpretation Unit, if we are unable to translate within our school building. We will call the 2018-19 CEP 68  Testing Memo's - Testing information: 2 weeks before testing Translation and Interpretation Unit if we are in need of an oral translation. Translators in our building. Documents will be sent to the Translation and Interpretation Unit, if we are unable to translate within our school building. We will call the Translation and Interpretation Unit if we are in need of an oral translation. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide interpretation service(s)? 9/20 ELL Orientation 9/22 Parent Teacher Conferences 11/2 PTC 3/8 PTC In school translators/interpreters. In school translators/interpreters. 4/25 NYSESLAT Meeting In school translators/interpreters. Interpreters are always available throughout the school day for Face to Face meetings, such as PTC and curriculum nights. Our school psychologist, social worker, parent coordinator and guidance counselors are all bilingual and are able to assist with translations. Our school psychologist, social worker, parent coordinator and guidance counselors are all bilingual and are able to assist with translations. Our school psychologist, social worker, parent coordinator and guidance counselors are all bilingual and are able to assist with translations. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. In an event of an emergency our strategy to reach all parents is through a translated e-mail blast and telephone calls made by our bilingual staff. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure 2018-19 CEP 69  Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Staff members are made aware of the goal of Chancellor's Regulation A-663 at a staff meeting held in September. The staff organizes translators before Parent Teacher Conferences and notices are given to the translators a week prior to being sent home. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) As you walk into the school you will notice that PS 100 provides notices of Language Assistance. There are also notices posted in the main office. The Parents Guide to Language Access poster is located in the main entrance of the school building. The Parent Coordinator has the Guide to Language Access pamphlets and flyer's in the Parent Coordinators Room. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? Ensuring the quality of our language services is critical to communicating effectively with our ELL parents. The Translation and Interpretation Unit works in collaboration with other DOE offices to roll-out the following evaluation mechanisms to ensure the successful implementation of its language access initiatives. There is the Principal Satisfaction Survey – Survey distributed to all school principals to assess the central supports provided to schools, including the provision of language services by the Translation and Interpretation and external language service providers. There is also the School Survey for Parents and it is made available to all school-aged parents to assess their child’s school, including whether or not the school is communicating with the parent in their native language. The Parent Coordinator will assist in surveying the parents at meetings to ensure their language needs are being met. 2018-19 CEP 70 
