2018-19 COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (CEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 20K112 School Name: P.S. 112 LEFFERTS PARK Principal: LOUISE VERDEMARE (ALFANO) 2018-19 CEP 1  Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 CEP 2  School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information Lefferts Park 332000010112 PK-5 School Number (DBN): 20K112 7115-15 th Ave Brooklyn, NY 11228 718 232-0685 718 232-3609 Phone Number: Fax: Louise Alfano lverdem@schools.nyc.gov Email Address: School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Louise Alfano MargaretWhite Stephanie Kuang Mary Kayser StephanieKuang none none District Information Geographical District: 20 Karina Costantino Superintendent: 415 89 th Street Brooklyn, NY 11209 Superintendent’s Office Address: kcostan@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718 759-4912 Phone Number: 718 759-4842 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) Brooklyn FSC: Executive Director: Mauricière De Govia 2018-19 CEP 3  Executive Director’s Office Address: 415 89th Street Brooklyn, NY 11209 mdegovi@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 718-759-4862 718-759-4960 Phone Number: Fax: 2018-19 CEP 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Louise Alfano Grace Holczer Stephanie Kuang N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Mary Kayser Danielle Deneen AriannaKirdahy Member/Staff Member/Staff Member/Staff 2018-19 CEP 5  Marina Argiro Stephen Chan Sandra Lopez My HoaTien ZhiChaoLin Elaine Lee Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Member/Staff Member/Parent Member/Parent Member/Parent Member/Parent Member/Parent Member/Parent Member/ Member/ 2018-19 CEP 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with 2018-19 CEP 7  the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement 2018-19 CEP 8  Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 1. What is your school’s mission statement? P.S. 112 Mission Statement: Section 4: CEP Overview P.S. 112 is committed to establishing and maintaining high standards of excellence for all of our students. A positive educational environment is maintained where parents, teachers, administrators and students are engaged cooperatively in developing academic and social growth. We are dedicated to the belief that all children can learn and 2018-19 CEP 9  we will strive to engage our students in active and productive activities that will develop independent, skilled learners who will be prepared fro all future endeavors. Children’s Mission Statement: We will learn to be Good Students, Good Friends And Good People. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. P.S. 112 is located in Dyker Heights Brooklyn. Currently, our school consists of grades PreK-5 and our student enrollment in both the main building and the annex is 681. Our English Language Learner (ELL) population is approximately 22.22% and our Special Education (SE) population is 17.84%. There are three to five classes, one to two of them being Integrated Co-Teaching (ICT) classes on each grade. The ICT model allows for the special and general education teachers to work together throughout the day to adapt and modify instruction for children and make sure the entire class has access to the general education curriculum. Additionally, we have a 12:1:1 Grade K/1/2 bridge class. Our school provides an ENL program for ELL students as well as a Dual Language Italian Program. Our goal is to develop each and every child into a lifelong learner. Our program includes a balanced approach to the teaching of reading and writing which is standards based. This approach incorporates large group, small group and individualized instruction within a workshop model. The workshop model includes a mini-lesson, independent work time and a share session. Additionally, students participate in daily Close Reading seminars where they read, analyze and discuss complex text using a Socratic Seminar approach. In all classrooms, teachers read aloud daily and provide daily word study to students. Engage NY is our standards based math program. All of our teaching approaches in mathematics continue to evolve as we participate in ongoing professional development and reflect on classroom-based teacher research. The Common Core Learning Standards set forth by New York State guide our planning. Social Studies is taught through the use of non-fiction and historical fiction to bring multiple perspectives of events in our world to students. We incorporate the Independent Investigation Method (IIM) which trains students in the research process as they are learning Social Studies concepts. The Science Curriculum is enhanced by a “hands-on” science cluster program, which involves students in demonstration and experimentation. The scientific process is developed and encouraged in each grade as is the integration of non-fiction literature into the science curriculum. Our wireless technology lab offers students the opportunity to conduct technology based projects. Additionally, our classrooms have wireless laptops and Promethean Boards which enable us to infuse technology into all curriculum areas. The arts are alive and well at P.S. 112. We offer students programs in fine art, dance, music appreciation, music instrument instruction, band, violin and chorus. Our partnership with the Brooklyn Conservatory of Music enhances the music program at our school. Students are supported academically with an Intervention Teacher, a Reading Recovery Teacher and two Reading Support Teachers who work in our classrooms to support students who need extra academic help in a small group setting. ENL instruction is provided to students who qualify daily. An Intervention Team is created to carefully assess students’ work, arrange parent meetings and create a targeted intervention plan for students who are experiencing academic challenges. Academic intervention services, such as speech and language as well as counseling are also available. 2018-19 CEP 10  Research indicates that the most effective way to encourage continuous learning and improve instruction, is for teachers to have opportunities to meet together to share ideas and participate in professional development. Our more experienced teachers generously share their time and expertise with newer staff members. The school program provides common planning periods to all grades to support this work. Our teachers complete surveys to request specific professional development tailored to their needs and also participate in organized workshops to meet our school-wide curriculum goals. We not only strive to create a community of learners within our classrooms, we are a community of learners! P.S. 112 encourages parental involvement in a variety of ways. The School Leadership Team (SLT) is comprised of administrators, staff and parents. The SLT meets monthly to address elements of the Comprehensive Education Plan (CEP), organize family events, review initiatives that have been put into place and keep abreast of school news. Additionally, the Parent Teacher Association (PTA) consists of parents who come together in order to benefit all the students of P.S. 112. The PTA holds monthly meetings to share information, encourage regular communication with parents and recruit volunteers for school functions. The PTA volunteers many hours in order to assist with fundraising and functions for the children throughout the school year. Their mission is to create enough funds so that we may continue providing excellent educational opportunities to our children. Our school also offers parent workshops to help parents assist their children at home academically and to provide information about city and state mandates. Additionally, our Parent Coordinator offers Adult ENL classes for the families of our students. P.S. 112 is always looking for innovative ways to bring families together! We host family events throughout the school year such as Movie Nights, Family Fun Night, Someone Special Dance and the Spring Arts Festival. Additionally, we have a school-wide Book of the Month. All the children read the Book of the Month with their class and throughout the month children bring the book home to read, discuss and write about with their families. Our school has formed special collaborations and partnerships with different organizations in an effort to provide a variety of opportunities for our children. For example, our school runs a philanthropy group where fourth and fifth grade students design fundraisers to donate money to organizations that the students research themselves. They also design service projects to help those in need. We have formed a partnership with Capital One Bank so our first and third grade students can participate in a program to learn about money, banking and finances. P.S. 112 has established a Growth Mindset Initiative whereby we encourage our students to understand and believe that their talents can be developed through hard work, good strategies, and input from others. Students with a growth mindset tend to achieve more than those with a more fixed mindset who believe their talents are innate, and cannot be changed. We teach our students to understand the power of "yet" and promote the phrase, "There's a difference between not knowing and not knowing yet." 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. Our English Language Learner (ELL) population is 22.22% and our Special Education (SE) population is 17.84%. In analyzing the data drawn from various ATS reports in the Education Data Analysis Tool (EDAT) for the 2017-2018 school year, we have identified specific ELL populations for targeted instruction to address student need. For example, 50 ELL students remained at the same proficiency level on the Spring 2018 NYSESLAT and 5 students regressed. Additionally, we have identified the modalities of need among grades. For example, ELL students in grades K-5 need additional support in writing as this was identified as the modality in which they performed the lowest. ELL students in grade 1 show low performance in the speaking modality. The 2017-2018 NYS ELA Item Analysis Report shows that grade 3 ELL and SWD students had the most difficulty with questions that involved determining word meaning, analyzing events and locating information. Grade 4 ELL and SWD students had the most difficulty with questions that involved determining word meaning and theme as well as 2018-19 CEP 11  sequence and cause and effect. Grade 5 ELL and SWD students had the most difficulty with questions that involved explaining relationships and structure as well as drawing conclusions on information. The 2017-2018 NYS Math Item Analysis Report shows that Grade 3 ELL and SWD students had the most difficulty with questions that involved fractions as fractions and applying multiplication and division properties. Grade 4 ELL and SWD students had the most difficulty with questions that involved fraction measurements and interpreting multiplication. Grade 5 ELLs and SWDs had the most difficulty with questions that involved 2D figures and shapes. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. P.S. 112 was rated Well Developed in all Quality Review Indicators during the 2014-2015 school year. A focus on the indicators related to the Rigorous Instruction element of the Framework for Great Schools shows that our area of celebration is ensuring engaging, rigorous and coherent curricula aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards in all subject areas with accessibility for a variety of learners. Our area of focus, although rated Well Developed, is strengthening the alignment of assessments to curricula and using these on-going assessments to analyze the information on student learning outcomes to adjust instructional decisions within the classroom as well as grade-wide. More specifically, for teachers to use assessment data to differentiate instruction in an effort to address individual students’ misunderstandings. When comparing the data from the 2016-2017 and 2017-2018 School Quality Guides, it shows that our school has made the most progress in the element of Strong Family-Community Ties. Last year, based on NYC School Survey Measures, our metric score was 3.94, increasing to 4.18 this past year. Additionally, our metric score for this element is 0.33 higher than the district and 0.39 higher than the city. Analysis of the data presented in the 2017-2018 School Quality Guide also shows that our school scored lower in the element of Supportive Environment, specifically in the measures of Classroom Behavior (82%). Although we had a .21 increase in this element, a key area of focus this year will be to continue fostering student-centered learning and building coherent instructional and social-emotional supports to improve achievement for all students, including ELLs, SWDs and advanced students. 2018-19 CEP 12  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 20K112 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 0K,01,02,03,04,05 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 681 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language YES Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 7 7 31 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 21 15 31 31 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 70.0% % Attendance Rate 67.8% % Reduced Lunch 23.9% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.3% 32.9% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 26.9% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 16.11 0% 8% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 63.1% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 89% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A YES NO NO YES Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A YES NO NO YES Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A YES High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 92 92 31 94.9% 1.8% 17.9% 0.1% 39.5% 0.6% 4 0% 8.1 66.0% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No N/A YES N/A NO YES N/A YES N/A NO YES N/A YES N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 CEP 13  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. P.S. 112 was rated Well-Developed on the 2014-2015 Quality Review on all five indicators. Within the Quality Review Indicators that reflect our instructional core, our school was successful in ensuring engaging, rigorous and coherent curricula aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS) in all subject areas creating accessibility for a variety of learners. We were also successful in understanding and implementing the instructional shifts and the Charlotte Danielson's Framework for Teaching to devise effective instruction that yields high quality student work. Additionally, although rated Well Developed, our focus was to strengthen the alignment of assessments to curricula and use these on-going assessments to analyze the information on student learning outcomes to adjust instructional decisions within the classroom as well as grade-wide. More specifically, for teachers to use assessment data to differentiate instruction in an effort to address individual students’ misunderstandings. The results of the 2018 New York State Common Core English Language Arts Assessment (NYSELA) show that 67%, 69% and 55% of students in grades 3, 4, and 5 respectively scored at levels 3 and 4. The total school performance in ELA is 63%, which is a 16% increase over last year. When tracking cohorts of students from year to year, data shows a 31% increase in students scoring proficiency from 3rd grade in 2017 to 4th grade in 2018 and 3% increase in students scoring proficiency from 4th grade in 2017 to 5th grade in 2018. Data also shows that 26% of Students with Disabilities (SWDs) reached proficiency, a 19% increase from 2017 and English Language Learners (ELLs) have made a 23% increase in proficiency from last year, from 6% to 29%. When tracking SWDs from year to year, data shows a 36% increase in students scoring proficiency from 3rd grade in 2017 to 4th grade in 2018 and 7% increase in students scoring proficiency from 4th grade in 2017 to 5th grade in 2018. When tracking ELLs from year to year, data shows students in 3rd grade in 2017 made any a 38% gain in the 4th grade in 2018 and 4th grade students in 2017 did not make any gains as 5th grade students the following year in 2018. The results of the 2018 New York State Common Core Math Assessment (NYS Math) show that 70%, 59% and 70% of students in grades 3, 4, and 5 respectively scored at levels 3 and 4. The total school performance in Math is 66%, a 12% increase from last year. When tracking cohorts of students from year to year, data shows a 14% increase in students scoring proficiency from 3rd grade in 2017 to 4th grade in 2018 and a 3% increase in students scoring 2018-19 CEP 14  proficiency from 4th grade in 2017 to 5th grade in 2018. Data also shows that 45% of SWDs reached proficiency, a 15% increase from last year and 46% of ELLs reached proficiency, a 22% increase since last year. When tracking SWDs from year to year, data shows students a 12 %decrease in students scoring proficiency from 3rd grade in 2017 to 4th grade in 2018 and a 3% increase in students scoring proficiency from 4th grade in 2017 to 5th grade in 2018. When tracking ELLs from year to year, data shows a 27% increase in students scoring proficiency from 3rd grade in 2017 to 4th grade in 2018 and a 10% increase in students scoring proficiency from 4th grade in 2017 to 5th grade in 2018. The results of the 2018 NYSESLAT were analyzed using the EDAT Tool. The data shows that out of a total of 152 ELL students who took the 2018 NYSESLAT, 24 ELL students (16.8%) scored at the commanding level as compared to 14% in the year prior. 44 ELL students advanced 1 proficiency level, 5 ELL students advanced 2 levels and 1 student advanced 3 levels. On the 2017 NYSESLAT, 35 ELL students advanced 1 proficiency level and 11 students advanced 2 proficiency levels. Additionally, data shows that 50 ELL students remained at the same proficiency level this year and 5 students regressed as compared to last year's assessment where 44 ELL students remained at the same proficiency level and 15 students regressed. Although data shows that our instruction is rigorous and well-developed and we made progress this year within this element of the framework, we will continue to focus our efforts on increasing student achievement in literacy and mathematics. As such, the priority need addressed in the goal and action plan is to improve student progress and performance within all academic areas through teachers’ use of formative and summative assessment data to differentiate instruction to address individual students’ misunderstandings. Additionally, teachers will design and implement project based learning opportunities with scaffolds and supports for all students such as rigorous math tasks that require students to persevere in problem solving as well as writing and social studies products and presentations. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 100% of all teachers will design and implement literacy instruction based on the Four Hallmarks of Advanced Literacy (engaging texts, rich discussion, frequent writing and academic vocabulary and language) to support English Language Learners as well as students with disabilities and advanced learners as evidenced by teacher observations in components 1e (Designing Coherent Instruction) and 3c (Engaging Students in Learning) of the Charlotte Danielson's Framework for Teaching. 2018-19 CEP 15 Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? K-1 students including English Sept. 2018 through June 2019 Classroom, content area, ENL, SETSS, AIS and Reading teachers and administration Sept.2018 through June 2019 Classroom, content area, ENL, SETSS, AIS and Reading teachers and administration Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Classroom teachers will implement daily shared reading experiences. During shared reading, students will practice a variety of reading strategies to target skills such as decoding, fluency and and comprehension. Teachers model close reading, text-dependent questioning, and strategies for asking and answering questions. This engages students in further discussion about a book and participating in these tasks allow them to practice citing evidence in support of their answers. Additionally, a vocabulary component is included to target tier one, tier two and tier three words. The embedded vocabulary instruction enhances student discussion about the text. Classroom teachers will implement daily, 30 minute close reading sessions using a Socratic Seminar Approach. ENL, SETSS, AIS and Reading teachers will implement close reading seminars with small groups of students, differentiating instruction based on need. During this scheduled time, students will read, analyze and discuss complex texts through the use of teacher questioning. Analyzing complex texts will increase higher order thinking and comprehension skills as well as introduce new and advanced vocabulary. Reading and comprehending texts of a complexity level within the grade appropriate band as identified by the CCLS is essential for high achievement in college and the workplace. Teachers will formatively assess students throughout the seminar discussion and students will set goals and reflect on their learning. Additionally, writing samples using text based evidence will be analyzed to monitor student progress and guide instruction. Formative assessment data and writing work samples will be analyzed for teacher inquiry work in order to identify successful strategies which will strengthen the academic achievement of our ELLs. Teachers will participate in a variety of professional development workshops focusing on strategies to enhance the teaching of advanced literacy for all learners incorporating Universal Design for Learning (UDL) and English as a New Language (ENL) strategies. Literacy workshops will focus on analysis and unpacking of the CCLS, using formative assessment during Language Learners (ELLs), Students with Disabilities (SWDs) and advanced learners 2-5 students including English Language Learners (ELLs), Students with Disabilities (SWDs) and advanced learners All teachers including ENL, Sept. 2018 through June 2019 SETSS, Classroom, content area, ESL, SETSS, AIS and Reading teachers and administration 2018-19 CEP 16  instruction to evaluate student learning and progress and the implementation of Socratic Seminars within our Close Reading sessions. AIS, and Reading teachers. . 3b – Parent and Family Engagement . . . How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Our school will engage families and support their understandings of Rigorous Instruction and the CCLS in order to increase student achievement and support their children at home. Parents are provided assistance in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments during PTA meetings. A review of the CCLS and the steps our school is taking to align curriculum to meet the standards is provided for parents. Parents are also provided user names and passwords for various literacy websites and research databases such as Tumble Books, Encyclopedia Britannica Online, Raz Kids and Brainpop so they can work with their children at home. Additionally, parents are provided with information and resources during parent workshops regarding the changes in the NYS assessments and the expectations of their children. We foster a caring home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child's progress. Monthly curriculum letters, students' reading levels as well as reading and writing goals are sent home to advise the parents of the units of study being taught and how their children are performing in school. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Resources to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan are as follows: literacy materials for Close Reading Seminars such as Readworks.com and Rally’s Understanding Complex Texts and Units of Studies for Teaching Reading and Writing by Lucy Caulkins. Additionally, Period 1 of our school day has been devoted to Close Reading Seminars and Shared Reading experiences for all students. Professional development workshops will be presented by in-house teachers and outside vendors. Various literacy websites will be available for families. Presenters for parent workshops will include teachers, PTA members and Parent Coordinator. Per session monies will be used for staff members and administration when providing workshops outside of the school day and substitute teachers will be placed for teachers when attending outside workshops. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA X Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A X C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG X PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Our school will engage in progress monitoring as a part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. By February 2019, teachers in grades K-5 will show Effective and Highly Effective ratings within components 1e (Designing Coherent Instruction) and 3c (Engaging Students in Learning) on informal and formal observations. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) 2018-19 CEP 17  Teacher formal and informal observations Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 18  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? According to the 2017-2018 School Quality Guide, the percent of positive responses in the measures of safety is 99%. Trends over the past few years show we consistently do well in this area. However, the need to focus on providing supports for social-emotional well-being to improve the school environment for students was developed as results indicate the percent of positive responses for Classroom Behavior is 82%, Peer Support for Academic Work is 86% and Social-Emotional measures are 89%. Our school is striving to develop students who play an active role in the learning process by becoming assessment capable learners who can offer academic peer support which in turn will encourage positive behavior. For the past three years, our school has been immersed in professional development around the formative assessment process. We are moving students toward understanding their progress as it applies to content, explaining the learning goals and what they need to do in order to improve. Teachers have been incorporating self and peer assessment coupled with providing quality feedback in order to encourage student-based learning. This year we will continue this work as well as provide additional opportunities for students to reflect on feedback and act immediately revising their work to meet the CCLS aligned success criteria. Additionally, this year we are implementing Harmony, a social-emotional program that builds strong classroom relationships and supportive learning communities to further support the whole child. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. 2018-19 CEP 19  By June 2019, teachers and administrators will continue to build and ensure student access to supports for social-emotional well-being in an effort to improve the school environment for all students including ELLs, SWDs, and advanced learners as evidenced by a 3% decrease in occurrences reported in OORS regarding the discipline code. 2018-19 CEP 20  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Grade 5 students will design presentations for grades K-4 students (One 50 minute presentation per grade) to identify and encourage the impact of the "Growth Mindset" on goal setting, academic growth and social-emotional well being. Students will then use grade appropriate rubrics in order to establish individual goals and reflect on work products. The staff will recognize students who demonstrate a Growth Mindset and show acts of kindness towards others on a daily basis. Administrators will announce their triumphs daily during the morning messages to promote academic growth and social-emotional well-being. Our school shares a familiar read once a month. The Books of the Month will be selected based on appropriate themes that will foster academic achievement and promote social-emotional well-being such as perseverance and treating others the way you want to be treated. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? K-5 students including English September 2018-October 2019 Teachers and Administrators Language Learners (ELLs), Students with Disabilities (SWDs) and advanced learners K-5 students including English September 2018-June 2019 Entire staff, including teachers, administrators and non-pedagogic staff Language Learners (ELLs), Students with Disabilities (SWDs) and advanced learners K-5 students including English Language Learners (ELLs), Students with Disabilities (SWDs) and Sept. 2018-June 2019 Teachers and administrators 2018-19 CEP 21 Our school will implement Harmony, a social-emotional program that builds strong classroom relationships and supportive learning communities. Harmony incorporates specialized teaching strategies into classroom activities—from pre K through fifth grade—in an effort to reduce bullying, inappropriate behavior and help develop our students into compassionate and caring adults. Teachers will implement the program 3x per week. Teachers will continue to provide or develop success criteria with their students and incorporate time for students to self and peer assess their work as this will encourage and support student-led learning. Sept. 2018-June 2019 Teachers and administrators Sept. 2018-June 2019 Teachers and administrators advanced learners K-5 students including English Language Learners (ELLs), Students with Disabilities (SWDs) and advanced learners K-5 students including English Language Learners (ELLs), Students with Disabilities (SWDs) and advanced learners 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Our school will engage families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support their children at home. During Parent Teacher Conferences and Parent Curriculum nights (September, November, March and May) teachers will provide parents with an understanding of our approach to social-emotional learning and how they can support our goals at home. Additionally, we will provide parents with an understanding of the specific strategies we implement to help their children monitor their learning process and work towards meeting their own goals. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Resources and professional development workshops to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan will be provided by lead teachers and support personnel from Harmony. Presenters for parent workshops will include teachers and administration. Per session monies will be used for staff members and administration when providing 2018-19 CEP 22  workshops outside of the school day and substitute teachers will be placed for teachers when attending outside workshops. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Our school will engage in progress monitoring as a part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. The mid-point benchmark that will indicate school progress toward meeting our goal is the OORS reports. Our log of OORS reports will show a decrease in incidents involving misbehavior as compared to last year. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. OORS reports Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 23  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. According to the 2017-2018 School Quality Guide, we scored 4.62 in the element of Collaborative Teachers. The percent of positive responses for each measure in this component is 92% or higher. We scored 0.44 higher than the district average and 0.83 higher than the city average. Although our rating of this component is high, it decreased from 4.72 last year. As previously stated, our English Language Learner (ELL) population is 25.22%. In analyzing the data drawn from various ATS reports in the Education Data Analysis Tool (EDAT), we have identified specific ELL populations for targeted instruction to address student need. For example, ELL students in grades K-5 need additional support in writing as this was identified as the modality in which they performed the lowest. ELL students in grade 2 show low performance in the speaking modality. The 2018 NYS ELA data shows that 29% of ELLs reached proficiency, a 23% increase from 2017. When tracking ELLs from year to year, NYS ELA data shows that students in 3rd grade in 2017 made a 38% gain as 4th graders in 2018 and from 4th grade in 2017 to 5th grade in 2018, ELL students did not make any gains. The 2018 NYS Math data shows that 46% of ELLs reached proficiency, a 22% increase from 2017. When tracking ELLs from year to year, data shows a 27% increase in students scoring proficiency from 3rd grade in 2017 to 4th grade in 2018 and an 10% increase in students scoring proficiency from 4th grade in 2017 to 5th grade in 2018. As such, the need to engage in inquiry work targeting ELLs in an effort to increase academic achievement in both ELA and Math was determined. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. 2018-19 CEP 24  By June 2019, 100% of teachers will be engaged in collaborative inquiry work in ELA and Math, individualizing instruction based on data to increase student achievement for all students including ELLs, SWDs and advanced learners as measured by a 3% increase in performance on ELA and Math Benchmarks and the NYS ELA and Math assessments. 2018-19 CEP 25  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Teachers will engage in inquiry work during the extended time on Mondays. Teachers will collaborate and use this time to review student data, identify target populations, research strategies to support students need and revise instructional plans in an effort to increase academic achievement of ELLs. Administrators will meet with teachers monthly to review unit plans for alignment to instructional goals. Additionally, administrators will conduct individual data meetings with all teachers to review 6 week benchmark results and instructional plans. Teachers will participate in a variety of professional development workshops focusing on strategies to enhance literacy and mathematics instruction for all learners incorporating Universal Design for Learning (UDL) and strategies for ELLs. Literacy workshops will focus on the analysis and unpacking of the CCLS and using formative assessment during instruction to evaluate student learning and progress. Teachers will participate in ongoing Engage NY workshops to ensure alignment to the CCLS, differentiate instruction for all learners and help students meet the rigorous demands of the standards. Teachers will administer ELA and Math Benchmark assessments aligned to the NYS ELA and Math Assessments every 6 weeks. Teachers will use their inquiry time on Mondays to analyze student data, revise instruction, and conduct small group strategy lessons to target areas of weakness. . 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Teachers and Administration 3, 6 week cycles through-out the 2018-2019 school year K-5 students including English Language Learners (ELLs), Students with Disabilities (SWDs) and advanced learners Teachers in grades K-5 Sept. 2018-June 2019 Teachers and Administration Teachers and Administrators Teachers in grades 2-5 October and November 2018 and January and February 2019 . . . How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. 2018-19 CEP 26  Our school will engage families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers in order to support their children at home. Parents will be invited to workshops, Parent Teacher Conferences and Parent Curriculum nights to develop a deeper understanding of our curriculum and how we have incorporated research-based strategies to target specific populations to help their children be successful in meeting grade level CCLS. Parents will be advised of their children's specific goals and strategies they can use to reach these goals so that parents can continue this work at home. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Teachers will use the "Analyzing Student Work Protocol" when they meet on Mondays to guide conversations and design next steps. Teachers will also use Goalbook, a web based application tailored to help educators design rigorous and differentiated instruction and vary the levels of instructional support for all students. Teachers will also use various professional texts, such as The 5 Components of Reading Development: A Classroom Teacher's Guide to Scaffolding Reading Instruction for ELL Students by Herrera, Perez and Kavimandan. Teachers will attend various professional development workshops around UDL and incorporating ENL strategies to support all learners. Presenters for parent workshops will include teachers and administration. Per session monies will be used for staff members and administration when providing workshops outside of the school day and substitute teachers will be placed for teachers when attending outside workshops. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA X Title II, Part A SIG PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Our school will engage in progress monitoring as a part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. By February 2019, the ELA and Math benchmarks will be compared to assess student performance and determine progress toward our goal of increasing achievement in ELA and Math by 3%. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Fountas and Pinnell Running Records, Benchmark ELA and Math assessments Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 27  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. According to the 2017-2018 NYC School Survey, our school scored a 4.28 in the element of Effective School Leadership. The percent of positive responses for all measures within this element is 94% or better. Additionally, we scored 0.41 and 0.67 higher than the district and the city consecutively. However, as compared to last year, our scored decreased from 4.37. In an effort to increase positives responses within the measures of Instructional Leadership and Program Coherence, administrators will continue to review student data to identify areas of concern. School leaders will design ELA and Math assessments, create an assessment calendar including time for teachers to score and analyze data. School Leaders will continue to conduct one to one data meetings with teachers within 6 week cycles. These cycles are designed to further identify trends across classrooms and grades to effectively target individualized and small group instruction in order to increase student mastery of grade level standards. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, school administrators will support teachers in their use of student assessment to inform and individualize instruction in ELA and Math for all students including ELLs, SWDs, and advanced learners as measured by 100% of teachers rating Effective or Highly Effective in component 3d (Using Assessment in Instruction) of the Charlotte Danielson's Framework for Teaching. 2018-19 CEP 28  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Administrators and Teachers will participate in monthly grade meetings to review unit plans and ensure the alignment to the CCSS. School Leaders will support teachers in designing lessons to meet individual students' needs. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Sept. 2018-June 2019 Teachers and Administrators K-5 students including English Language Learners (ELLs), Students with Disabilities (SWDs) and advanced learners Administrators and teachers will participate in data meetings, every 6 weeks to review ELA and Math Benchmarks. School Leaders will support teachers in identifying areas of concern and design instruction and strategy groups to target specific students. K-5 students including English Sept. 2018-June 2019 Teachers and Administrators Administrators will conduct formal and informal observations to assess teachers' use of data to design instruction and strategy groups. School Leaders will provide timely feedback to support teachers with this goal. Language Learners (ELLs), Students with Disabilities (SWDs) and advanced learners K-5 students including English Language Learners (ELLs), Students with Disabilities (SWDs) and Sept. 2018-June 2019 Administrators 2018-19 CEP 29  . advanced learners . . . 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Our school will engage families and support their understanding of our goal of using student data, including the ELA and Math Benchmarks to increase student achievement. Parents will be provided with progress monitoring reports. Parents will be advised of their children's specific goals and strategies they can use to reach these goals so that parents can continue this work at home. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Substitute teachers will be hired to provide time for teachers to score the assessments and analyze the data. Teachers will use this time to design instruction for small groups to target areas of concern. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Our school will engage in progress monitoring as a part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. By February 2019, teachers in grades K-5 will show Effective and Highly Effective ratings in component 1d (Using Assessment in Instruction) on informal and formal observations. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Teacher formal and informal observations Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 30  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. According to the 2014-2015 Quality Review, our school scored Well Developed in effectively partnering with families to support student success. When comparing the data from the 2016-2017 and 2017-2108 School Quality Guides, the overall score for the element, Strong Family-Community Ties increased from 3.94 to 4.18. However, the percent of parents who say that they have had the opportunity to volunteer time to support the school was 78%. The results of the 2018 New York State Common Core English Language Arts Assessment (NYSELA) show that 67%, 69% and 55% of students in grades 3, 4, and 5 respectively scored at levels 3 and 4. The total school performance in ELA is 63%, which is a 16% increase over last year. Data also shows that 26% of Students with Disabilities (SWDs) reached proficiency, a 19% increase from 2017 and English Language Learners (ELLs) have made a 23% increase in proficiency from last year, from 6% to 29%. The results of the 2018 New York State Common Core Math Assessment (NYS Math) show that 70%, 59% and 70% of students in grades 3, 4, and 5 respectively scored at levels 3 and 4. The total school performance in Math is 66%, a 12% increase from last year. Data also shows that 45% of SWDs reached proficiency, a 15% increase from last year and 46% of ELLs reached proficiency, a 22% increase since last year. The results of the 2018 NYSESLAT were analyzed using the EDAT Tool. The data shows that out of a total of 152 ELL students who took the 2018 NYSESLAT, 24 ELL students (16.8%) scored at the commanding level as compared to 14% in the year prior. 44 ELL students advanced 1 proficiency level, 5 ELL students advanced 2 levels and 1 student advanced 3 levels. Additionally, data shows that 50 ELL students remained at the same proficiency level this year and 5 students regressed. Research shows a high correlation between student achievement and parental involvement. As such, our goal is to continue encouraging parental involvement in a variety of ways. The priority need addressed in the goal and action plan is to continue increasing family involvement of all students including families of ELL students and SWDs at workshops, PTA meetings as well as school events by providing families with widely advertised invitations, presentations and information sessions offered by school-based members as well as community-based organizations. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. 2018-19 CEP 31  By June 2019, 50%-70% of all PTA Meetings (5-7 out of 10 meetings) will include learning opportunities for parents in the form of presentations and information sessions facilitated by a community-based organization, community partners or school-based personnel as reported by agenda and minute documents. 2018-19 CEP 32  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Our school will continue to design innovative ways to provide families with notifications of upcoming events, workshops and meetings. All monthly calendars and notices of meetings will be sent home to families in multiple languages in an effort to reach our diverse school community. We will display a list of all the family events happening for the month in the front corridor for parent awareness. In an effort to increase parent participation, questionnaires will be sent home to families, in all languages, with possible workshop ideas for parents to identify presentations and workshops that best suit their needs. PTA meetings will include presentations and information sessions facilitated by community based organizations, school-based personnel and community partners. These workshops will include information for all families to address the needs of all students including ELLs and SWDs. Based on the September Parent Surveys, Dial-A-Teacher workshops will provide support for families to help their children with homework and problem solving strategies. The Center for Integrate d Teacher Education (CITE) will provide workshops focusing on Helping Your ELL Children Learn English and Understanding the Common Core Learning Standards. NYC Parent Partnership will offer information sessions about special education, Individual Education Plans (IEPs), learning disabilities as well as providing resources for parents to support their children at home. Teachers will organize workshops for the parents and families of their own students based on a needs assessment of student learning targets. Teachers will assess student learning and outcomes to design workshops and information sessions that can help parents help their children at home. These will include navigating the state website and Raz Kids. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Families Sept 2018-June 2019 PTA, Parent Coordinator and Administration Families Families PTA, Parent Coordinator and Administration PTA, Parent Coordinator and Administration Sept. 2018, December 2018 and March 2019 Monthly meetings from Sept. 2018-June 2019 Families Sept. 2018-June 2019 Teachers and Administration If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. 2018-19 CEP 33   Dancing Classrooms NYC  Marquis Studios  Capital One Bank Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Resources to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan are as follows: PTA, Parent Coordinator, administrators and presenters for workshops, per session monies for presenters, books and materials for presentations. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA Title II, Part A SIG X PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Our school will engage in progress monitoring as a part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Agendas and from parent workshops and PTA meetings have been identified as our mid-point benchmarks and will be reviewed in order to identify progress towards meeting our goal of the inclusion of information sessions at 50%-70% of all meetings. By February 2019, agendas will be reviewed to determine progress toward our goal of fifty to seventy percent of meeting agendas including informational items to support the parent/school connection. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Meeting agendas Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 34  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Mathematics Science Social Studies Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Levels 1and 2 on the NYS ELA Assessment, Reading Benchmark assessments, post unit assessments, guided reading, conferences, writing samples Levels 1and 2on the NYS Math Assessment, pre and post unit assessments, math tasks, classroom observations and conferences Science tasks, unit assessments, classroom observations and conferences Unit assessments, end of unit projects, classroom observations and conferences Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) ELA interventions includeWilson Reading System, double dose Fundations, Reading Recovery, Imagine Learning and Spire SETSS and Push-In teachers, before and after school small group instruction, Mathletics Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) AIS providers work with at-risk students in small group or one-to-one sessions depending on the program and level of intervention deemed appropriate. Teachers work with at-risk students in small groups SETSS and Push-In teachers Teachers work with at-risk students in small groups SETSS and Push-In teachers Teachers work with at-risk students in small groups When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) AIS providers work with students during the school day. Teachers also provide AIS services either before or after school. SETSS and Push-In teachers work with students during the school day. Teachers also provide AIS services either before or after school. SETSS and Push-In teachers work with students during the school day. Teachers also provide AIS services either before or after school. SETSS and Push-In teachers work with students during the school day. Teachers also provide AIS services either before or after school. 2018-19 CEP 35  At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Classroom performance, social/emotional difficulties, teacher observations, PPT consultations Counseling or Speech Services Counselors or speech teachers work with students in small groups or one-to-one sessions. Counselors and speech teachers work with students during the school day 2018-19 CEP 36  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) We have 31 students, approximately 4.57% of our total school population, in temporary housing 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. Students living in temporary housing situations are entitled to the same public education and services available to permanently housed students. Administration will assess the needs of our STH population throughout the school year. We will provide any educational services as needed such as, counseling and intervention. We will also provide school supplies or materials as needed such as, books or glasses. Our school will ensure that STH students have access to the essential programs and materials they need to progress academically and succeed in school. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 CEP 37  N/A 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. N/A 2018-19 CEP 38  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. All of the teachers at P.S. 112 are Highly Qualified Teachers. P.S. 112 has partnerships with St. Francis and St. Joseph’s Colleges for student teacher placement. These partnerships provide us with a pool of candidates from which to draw our future staff members. P.S. 112 offers a wide variety of professional development and workshops for teachers. These workshops provide training and support in reading, writing, math and technology as well science and the arts. The professional development sessions and workshops are held throughout the school year and provide teachers the support they need to refine instructional practices. Additionally, teachers are given the opportunity to request professional development in areas that align to their professional goals. This is accomplished through the use of professional development surveys and teacher goal setting. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). To ensure all students meet the Common Core State Standards, teachers, administrators, paraprofessionals and other school-based staff regularly receive professional development around the CCLS. Professional development workshops that focus on reading, writing, math and technology instruction for all learners are provided by expert staff as well as outside facilitators. Teachers meet in grade teams and with administrators during common prep periods, grade conferences and weekly collaboration periods to address instructional strategies to meet the CCLS. Our school participates in Teachers College Professional Learning to ensure we are kept abreast regarding NYC Instructional Expectations to meet the CCLS. Additionally, teachers and administrators attend and provide workshops regarding the Danielson framework, which highlights best instructional practices for teachers to help their students meet the demands of the CCLS. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 2018-19 CEP 39  3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). In September, teachers will engage students in stories, songs and chants to help ease the transition into Kindergarten. Teachers will establish routines for children giving them a sense of security. Students will have the opportunity to explore their classroom, tour the building and meet teachers and staff who are important to the school community. Additionally, teachers will have parents fill out beginning of the year surveys about their children in an effort to learn about his/her habits, likes, dislikes, favorite things to do and special talents. In June, our school will provide a Kindergarten Orientation for the parents of our Pre-K students as well as the newly enrolled Kindergarten students. During this time, the children have the opportunity to experience the “new” Kindergarten classroom environment. The children play in centers, sift through books, sing songs, draw and socialize with other children. The parents meet the Kindergarten teachers and have the opportunity to take a tour of the classrooms. The parents are also provided with a summary of the curriculum, websites to access resources and a book to read aloud with their children at home. Our school will also provide workshops for parents on topics relevant to transitioning from Pre-K to Kindergarten including strategies for parents to use and continue at home. 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. Teachers participate in the decision making process regarding the use and selection of appropriate assessment measures as well as professional development regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. Our Instructional Team, facilitated by administrators and comprised of teachers from all grade levels, meets monthly to make instructional decisions including decisions regarding the use of assessments and data analysis. The instructional team members turnkey the work of the team to their colleagues during common prep periods and weekly collaboration periods. Teachers also meet during these allotted times to review student work samples and use the data to guide instruction. Teachers are also represented on the MOSL committee and participate in decisions regarding school-wide assessments. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible 2018-19 CEP 40  for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Column B Section Reference(s) 5A, 5B, 5C, 5D, 5E, 6, 7, 8 5A, 5C 5A, 5C, 5E, 6 5A, 5B, 5C, 5D, 5E, 6, 8 Title I Part A (Basic) Federal Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Federal Federal Federal Tax Levy (FSF) Local 402,339.00 37,473.00 20,302.00 tbd 4,316,648.00 X X X X 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., 2018-19 CEP 41  semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 CEP 42  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. P.S. 112, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. The school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. P.S. 112 will support parents and families of Title I students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; 2018-19 CEP 43  ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership by disseminating monthly curriculum letters and student progress reports every other month during the school year to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; Parental Involvement and School Quality In developing the Title I Parent and Family Engagement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent-Teacher Association, as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent and Family Engagement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent-Teacher Association and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g.,ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, NYC School Survey Report; 2018-19 CEP 44  ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the ESSA; ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent-Teacher Association and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. P.S. 112 School-Parent Compact (SPC) School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 CEP 45  P.S. 112 , in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. We will provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); We will support home-school relationships and improve communication by: I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent and Family Engagement Policy and this Compact; 2018-19 CEP 46  ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; We will provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; We will provide general support to parents by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent and Family Engagement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; 2018-19 CEP 47  Parent/Guardian responsibilities are as follows: II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities are as follows: ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; III. Student Responsibilities 2018-19 CEP 48  ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 2018-19 CEP 49  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 2018-19 CEP 50  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: The rationale for our Title III Supplemental Program is based on careful analysis of the data provided by the NYSESLAT and the NYSELA assessments. The results of the 2018 NYSESLAT show that 16.8% of ELLs scored at the Commanding level, a 2.8% increase from last year. When comparing the results of the 2017 and 2018 NYSELA assessments, data shows a 23% increase in ELL students scoring proficiency. Although our data shows gains, we will continue to support our ELLs with a supplemental program focusing on literacy and language acquisition. We have determined that our Title III Supplemental Program will take place after-school as research shows after school instruction has a positive effect on students’ development. After-school programs can have an impact on academic achievement, improve social and personal skills and maintain positive behaviors. Our Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs will take place after school and is designed to ensure all of our ELL students have access to the program. The program will be taught in English by 3 ENL teachers in collaboration with 12 content area teachers. The program will run from November 2018 to May 2019. The ENL teachers will support grades 1-5 Entering, Emerging students during the first cycle, November-February. The ENL teachers will service the ELL Transitioning students during the second cycle, March-May. The students will be grouped by grade and proficiency levels and meet once a week from 2:45pm-3:45pm. These students will learn English language skills through shared reading experiences. Teachers will plan guided reading and strategy groups using leveled texts provided by On Our Way to English, an English Language Development Program and leveled guided reading books. These texts are specifically designed for ELLs and allow them to build their fiction and informational reading skills while building content knowledge. Expanding ELL students in grades 1-5 will be serviced in English by their classroom teacher. These content area teachers will co-plan with the ENL teachers and provide small group strategy instruction two times per week from 2:45pm-3:45pm. The co-planning sessions between the ENL teachers and the content area teachers will take place once a month during the professional learning periods on Mondays. The Expanding students in Grades 1-5 will be supported with reading, writing, listening and speaking strategies designed to support outcomes on the New York State English as a Second Language Achievement Test (NYSESLAT). The Expanding students in grades 3-5 will also prepare for the New York State English Language Arts Assessment (NYS ELA). Offer letters will be sent home in all languages and teachers will take attendance at each session, keeping this information on file. The teachers will use leveled guided reading books provided by On Our Way to English. The guided reading materials are at no cost to Title III. Shared reading materials as well as materials used for art and theater will be at no cost to Title III. Teachers will use NYSESLAT and NYSELA test preparation materials such as Getting Reading for the NYSESLAT and various fiction and nonfiction leveled texts to increase achievement on the state assessments as well as support students in reaching grade level standards. A professional text, The 5 Components of Reading Development: A Classroom Teacher's Guide to Scaffolding Reading Instruction for 2018-19 CEP 51  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information ELL Students was purchased at cost to Title III for teachers to support their curriculum for ELL students. Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: • Our school's professional development program will consist of workshops and training sessions for teachers. Ongoing professional development ensures that educators continue to grow and strengthen their instructional practices as well as ensure effective delivery of newly implemented programs. This ongoing professional development will provide teachers with the skills and strategies they need to support ELL students' language acquisition as well as literacy development. • Professional development workshops will be provided for Title III Program teachers as well as other teachers responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. • During the 2018-2019 school year, professional development opportunities have been designed to support the teachers of the Title III Supplemental program as well as all teachers of ELLs. The ENL teachers of the Title III Program will receive professional development from November 2018 to May 2019 once a month for 30 minutes each session at no cost to Title III. The ENL teachers will receive professional development in guided reading and strategy groups with an emphasis on ENL strategies to increase vocabulary, language acquisition and reading comprehension skills. The content area teachers will receive professional development in literacy and test readiness instruction to prepare students for the NYSESLAT and the NYSELA assessment. ENL teachers will also participate in workshops provided by the Brooklyn South Field Support Center. The ENL teachers will turn key the information they receive at these workshops to all teachers of ELLs. All teacher of ELLs will participate in the professional development workshops to be held one Monday in each of the following months for 80 minutes per session: November, December, February, March and April. Attendance records and agendas for all workshops will be maintained. • The professional development workshops will cover the following topics: guided reading, NYSESLAT and NYSELA test readiness, and using ENL strategies to meet the Common Core Learning Standards in reading and writing. • The assistant principal, Margaret Marascia, will provide professional development to the teachers of ELLs in guided reading. The reading specialist of grades 3 and 4, Gisella Trunzo, will collaborate with the teachers of ELLs providing content areas teachers with ENL strategies to support literacy instruction for ELL students to meet grade level standards and increase performance on the state assessments. 2018-19 CEP 52  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: • Our school will provide family workshops for parents of ELLs in an effort to impact higher achievement for ELLs. Research shows that when schools and families work together to support learning, children tend to do better in school, stay in school longer and like school more. • Our school will provide ongoing workshops for parents throughout the 2018-2019 school year. The workshops will be held 3 days a week for 1 hour and 10 minutes each session. They will began in October 2018 and run through June 2019 totalling approximately 96 sessions. • The weekly workshops will be provided to support ELL parents with their own literacy and language acquisition. They will provide parents with strategies to support their children in reading, writing, listening and speaking and encourage English speaking at home. Additionally, information regarding the state assessments will be provided to ELL parents such as student expectations and skills and strategies for increased performance. • The parent workshops to support ELL parents will be provided by our Parent Coordinator, Maria Gaita, at no cost to Title III. Mrs. Gaita has been the Parent Coordinator at P.S. 112 servicing our ELL parents for 7 years. • Our Parent Coordinator and teachers will send home all school correspondence in all languages so parents are made aware of the activities available to them. Additionally, translation services will be available at events to support our non-English speaking parents. The Parent Coordinator and teachers will maintain copies of agendas, attendance sheets and invitation letters in all languages to keep on file. Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits)  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. 2018-19 CEP 53  Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title.  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL 2018-19 CEP 54  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 20 School Name Lefferts Park Borough Brooklyn School Number 112 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Louise Alfano Coach n/a ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Danielle Deneen/ENL Teacher/Subject Area Donna Matarese/ENL Teacher/Subject Area Emanuela Shehu/ENL Related-Service Provider n/a Superintendent type here Assistant Principal Mary Kayser Coach n/a School Counselor n/a Parent Stephanie Kuang Parent Coordinator Field Support Center Staff Member Other (Name and Title) n/a C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 3 3 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 2 0 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 649 2018-19 CEP 55 Total number of ELLs 153 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 23.57%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Yes NoFreestanding ENL Yes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Italian Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Opened (e.g., 2013-14) Lang. Italian 2015-2016 Program TBE TBE TBE DL K 0 0 0 1 1 0 0 0 1 2 0 0 0 1 3 0 0 0 0 4 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 0 0 1 DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 5 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 3 0 0 3 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? Our school uses formative and curriculum-embedded assessments to guide instructional planning for our ELL students. The Fountas and Pinnell Benchmark Assessment System is used to assess early literacy skills for our ELLs. The Fountas and Pinnell reading assessments indicate the comprehension, decoding, and reading fluency levels of our students. Teachers use this data to design small group instruction based on student need. Additionally, success criteria are incorporated into all lesson plans for students to clearly understand expectations and guide their independent work. Teachers analyze student outcomes to design instruction for groups of students. In mathematics, teachers use exit tickets after each lesson and administer math tasks weekly to assess student learning and design small group instruction. Additionally, math modular assessments and benchmarks in ELA are administered every 6 weeks. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? 2018-19 CEP 56  We have structures in place to support the use of assessments to guide instructional planning. The assessments are administered at specifically selected points of the school year to continuously measure progress and inform instruction. Assessment calendars are distributed annually. Fountas and Pinnell running records are administered 3 times a year for readers on grade level and 4 times a year for struggling readers. Math tasks are administered weekly. Providing success criteria is built into every lesson and exit tickets are used in mathematics to assess student learning. Additionally, classroom teachers can meet with ENL teachers to review and analyze student work in order to guide their instructional planning on Mondays during inquiry work or Tuesdays during the time designated for other professional work. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? Grades K-2 integrate Fundations into their daily instruction to teach phonological/phonemic awareness, phonics and spelling. All grades administer Engage NY unit math assessments. Teachers use these units assessments to track student progress and make instructional decisions. Additionally, teachers administer pre, benchmark and post assessments in ELA and Math that are aligned to the NYS assessments. The data obtained from these assessments is recorded and analyzed to identify student progress and areas of need as well as to inform lesson planning. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? Students are grouped for reteaching based on summative data. Reteaching days as well as the organization of small groups are designed using data analysis sheets. Additionally, once the summative data has been gathered and analyzed, teachers, administrators and related service providers make decisions to provide academic intervention services to students in need. The Pupil Personnel Team (PPT) meets monthly to review data and recommend appropriate intervention services designed to address individual student need. Interventions such as Sounds in Motion, targeted small group instruction, Spire and Imagine Learning are available at our school to address student academic concerns. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] Our school uses data to guide instruction for ELLs within the RTI framework. Teachers regularly collect and analyze data through one on one conferences, running records, math assessments, teacher observations and state assessments. Through the RTI model, we use this data to determine whether students are benefiting from an instructional program within a reasonable time, build more effective instructional programs for students who are not benefiting and design more effective, individualized instructional programs. Additionally, Academic Intervention services such as Spire is offered in ELA and during the school day as well as before school using small group instruction. Close reading seminars are provided for ELL students by certified ENL teachers using ENL strategies to support ELA instruction. These supports provide prevention and intervention efforts for academically at-risk ELLs. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. Our school uses various outcome assessments to evaluate the success of our ENL program. We review the data collected from the NYSITELL and NYSESLAT to determine trends over the past few years as well as across the two exams. Using the ELL Data Analysis Tool (EDAT), we identify which modalities of the NYSESLAT are areas of need for our students. We identify which students did not make progress or regressed on the NYSESLAT. We review the data collected from the NYS ELA and Math exams, evaluating student progress to help determine the success of our program. Teachers are provided with an item analysis report of the NYS ELA and Math assessments. These reports reveal how students performed on specific questions and within specific standards. Additionally, we identify those students who received a level 1 or 2 on the NYS ELA and Math exams for one or more years consecutively. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? Administrators gather data from different sources, such as the EDAT Tool and disseminate the data to teachers during Instructional Team meetings and monthly grade team meetings. Teachers are provided time to work together in teams to review the data, revise curriculum and design instruction for small groups. Additionally, data analysis days are provided 2018-19 CEP 57  following each benchmark so that teachers can review assessments and have time to plan instructional strategies for groups of students based on the data. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. As per CR Part 154.2, stand-alone and integrated models of instruction are implemented within the Freestanding ENL program to provide ELLs with the mandated number of minutes and units of study per week of ENL services. All ELL students in grades K-5 are heterogeneously grouped within the general education classes. Through the stand-alone and integrated teaching models, ELL students are grouped considering grade and proficiency levels. Entering and Emerging students receive 180 minutes of stand-alone ENL services provided by a certified ENL teacher to develop their English language skills. They receive 180 minutes of integrated services provided by an ENL teacher and a certified content area teacher through a co-teaching model to build their language skills through ELA instruction in the classroom. Transitioning and Expanding students receive 180 minutes of integrated services provided by an ENL teacher and a certified content area teacher through a co-teaching model to build their language skills through ELA instruction within the classroom. We continue to support our Commanding ELL students by providing 90 minutes of Integrated ENL services through small group instruction in the classroom. Additionally, ELL teachers attend monthly grade conferences where planning strategies are identified. b. TBE program. If applicable. N/A: Our school does not have a TBE program. c. DL program. If applicable. As per CR Part 154.2, Dual Language programs have a very clear language policy: students receive half of their instruction in English, and half of their instruction in the other/target language. Language is taught through the content areas as well as through literacy. Our Dual Language program is designed to have students spend 50% of their instructional time immersed in Italian with a teacher speaking only Italian and the remaining part of the day is spent with instruction delivered only in English. Our dual language program includes stand alone ENL and HLA components designed to develop student's skills in listening, speaking, reading and writing in both English and Italian. Additionally, our dual language program contains an integrated instruction component whereby all content areas are taught in both languages. 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? As per NYS CR Part 154.2, Entering and Emerging students receive 360 minutes of ENL instruction per week and Transitioning and Expanding students receive 180 minutes of ENL instruction per week. Commanding students will receive 90 minutes of ENL instruction per week for an additional 2 years after passing the NYSESLAT. Our school programming supports schedules for students to ensure that these mandates are met. ELA and ENL instruction is delivered through each program model. Our ELA curriculum aligns with the ELA instruction within the ENL classroom and through the use of Integrated ENL, our ENL teachers push into the classroom providing ELA instruction using ENL strategies in small groups. Our Dual Language program is designed to continue developing students’ home language of Italian, as well as English language skills. In addition, the English-proficient students are given the opportunity to learn a new language. The Dual Language 2018-19 CEP 58  program serves both ELL students in need of English language development and monolingual English proficient students who are interested in learning Italian as 50% of instructional time is taught in Italian and 50% of instructional time is taught in English. Both groups provide good linguistic role models for each other and, through their interactions support language development in both English and the target language. An HLA component designed to develop students' skills in listening, speaking, reading and writing in Italian while cultivating an appreciation of their history and culture is programmed and implemented daily. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. Within our instructional program, including the ENL and Dual Language programs, we are implementing a Balanced Literacy approach to the teaching of reading, writing, math, social studies and science. The skills of listening, speaking, reading and writing are included in our daily instruction. This approach incorporates the workshop model where instruction is delivered to a large group. Students have the opportunity to practice strategies on their own or with a partner as the teacher circulates, monitoring outcomes. The teacher, in turn, uses this formative assessment to design small group and individualized instruction for students who need additional support and more proficient students can continue working independently. Literacy instruction is delivered through various approaches such as, close reading, shared reading, independent reading and read-aloud. Poetry is used to improve the listening, speaking and phonemic awareness skills of our students. Our highly qualified ENL teachers use a scaffolded instructional approach within the ENL Program. This approach is aligned with the classroom reading, writing, social studies and science curriculum and the Common Core Learning Standards. Ongoing articulation and planning with the classroom teachers ensures an individual approach is taken with all students. Our ELL students have a wealth of library books and instructional materials in their ENL classrooms in all content areas which supports them in meeting standards in reading and writing. Native language supports for the content area are also provided within the ENL program with the use of books in home languages, glossaries and dictionaries. ELL students receive native language support from peers or teachers who speak the same language. ENL strategies such as the use of visuals, hands-on manipulatives, Total Physical Response (TPR), repetition, graphic organizers, pictures, videos and computer programs are used to promote oral language development and to facilitate content area ENL instruction related to reading, writing, science, social studies and mathematics. Instruction for the Dual Language program is aligned to meet NYS Common Core Learning Standards. Literature, informational and foundational standards are delivered in English and Italian using grade appropriate texts. Writing instruction and writing tasks allow for opportunities to use both languages. Mathematics and Science instruction is conducted in English with extension activities in Italian in order to build number sense, reasoning, and practice in Italian. Social Studies instruction is conducted in both Italian and English. Speaking and Listening is incorporated into all subject areas to meet grade level standards as well as develop language skills in both languages. . 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? Our ELL students do not take the Home Language Assessments for reading in Chinese or Spanish. However, we support our ELLs in their home language throughout the school year. Teachers provide opportunities daily for students to use their native language and student writing assignments are completed in their home language. ELL students are encouraged to share with the class how to say something in their home language and students who speak languages other than English are called on to be buddies for others who speak the same language which provides opportunities for partner work in other languages. Additionally, resources such as dictionaries, glossaries and books are provided in students' native languages. Paraprofessionals also provide native language support to ELLs and work in their native language on Math assessments to mirror their accommodations on the state assessments. 2018-19 CEP 59  5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status The level of English proficiency varies among the ELLs at our school therefore, the need to differentiate instruction is prevalent. Students' level of English proficiency determines what type of instruction or additional support they will receive. a and d) At this time our school does not have SIFE or Long-Term ELL students however, if we did, these students would be eligible for Academic Intervention Services (AIS) support. b) Newcomers are grouped homogeneously for daily Close Reading Sessions. These sessions are specifically designed for ELLs and are provided by the ENL teachers. Teachers use Fundations and support vocabulary and language growth. Students are provided additional support if the assessments reveal they have not meet criteria to progress to the next level. The teachers use interactive read alouds, fiction as well as nonfiction, to foster listening and speaking skills and practice reading strategies such as retelling. Computer programs are also used such as Spelling City, Raz Kids, Imagine Learning and Discovery Education. c and e) Developing ELL students who receive service 4 to 6 years and those who reach proficiency on the NYSESLAT participate in daily Close Reading sessions. These sessions meet the number of minutes required for Former ELLs up to 2 years after exiting ELL status. Teachers use ongoing classroom assessment to identify students’ needs which drives instruction. These needs are addressed and supported in reading, writing and mathematics during small group or one on one instruction. These students may also receive AIS support during the school day as well as in after school sessions. Instruction for ELLs who are identified as students with disabilities is also differentiated. These students may receive additional support through Resource Room with a certified special education teacher. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? Our school ensures ELL-SWDs receive all services mandated on their IEPs. All teachers of ELL-SWDs are notified of their students with IEP mandates and have access to SESIS whereby they can use the IEP to set goals and target instruction. If an ELL-SWD requires bilingual instruction and our school does not offer a TBE program, we provide the student with an alternate placement paraprofessional as well as ENL instruction with a certified ENL teacher. Teachers of ELL-SWD use strategies and grade-level materials that provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development. For example, teachers differentiate instruction by forming small groups based on need and conduct one to one conferences to informally assess students' strengths and weaknesses. Teachers provide picture support, graphic organizers and texts on students' independent reading levels to support their learning. Manipulatives are used in math to help students understand concepts and computers and Smartboards are also used in various subject areas to assist in student learning. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? P.S. 112 uses curricula, instructional and scheduling flexibility to meet the diverse needs of ELL-SWDs within the least restrictive environment. ELL-SWDs receive their mandated number of minutes of ENL services through an integrated or stand alone model of instruction. Additionally, there is an Integrated Co-Teaching class on grades K-5 providing a lower teacher to student ratio for small group instruction in all subject areas. AIS providers push into the K-5 classrooms during Reading workshop to work with small groups of students in an effort to maximize the time spent with non-disabled peers. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. As a result of data analysis of the NYS ELA and Math assessments as well as NYSESLAT, intervention programs are designed to support ELLs in targeted areas. Close reading seminars are provided for ELL students by certified ENL teachers using ENL 2018-19 CEP 60  strategies to support ELA instruction. In the AIS Reading and Writing program students, including those with special needs, are serviced with an additional teacher who pushes in during their regular reading period. This reduces the teacher to student ratio and allows for individual and small group support based on the goals recommended on their IEPs. Small group lessons are planned to include all aspects of the ELA standards which include reading, writing, listening and speaking. AIS services are also provided in the after school setting. Additional student services include Reading Recovery, At-risk Resource Room, At-risk Speech, Double does of Fundations and the Wilson Reading program. Intervention programs are provided in English however, materials such as books, glossaries and dictionaries are provided in students' native language to support academic achievement. Additionally, our school conducts Inquiry Cycles whereby teachers find research related to the learning challenges of a target population, identify classroom and school level strategies that are supported by research, implement their findings to support struggling students and analyze student data to make instructional decisions. This year, our school-wide inquiry focus will target newly identified ELL students to support their language acquisition and literacy development. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? This year, our school will continue to incorporate a 30 minute block of time for Close Reading using the Socratic Seminar approach. During this time, instruction is differentiated for ELL students. ENL teachers are using ENL strategies to scaffold reading strategies and discussion techniques to analyze text. Additionally, our school will implement a new mathematics program, Engage NY, which differentiates instruction as it provides scaffolded strategies for ELL students. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? We are not discontinuing any bilingual programs. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. All students, including ELLs, have equal access to all school programs, academic or extra-curricula, whether they take place during or after school. Admittance into the programs is contingent upon the program itself. For example, if a student wants to participate in an extra-curricula activity such as, Band, Chorus, Tennis or Violin, a letter is sent home, translated in his/her native language, along with an application to be completed by the student. If it is an academic program, such as a test preparation class or AIS after school, a permission slip, translated in their parent's preferred language, is sent home. Supplemental services for ELLs include Saturday literacy workshops, where students and parents participate in language building activities through shared reading, art and theater experiences. Additionally, ELL students participate in after school art classes through our collaboration with Marquis Studios. These art classes promote language and literacy development through various art forms such as dance and music. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. We are in the process of building our classroom libraries with native language books in different genres, dictionaries, glossaries, and software to help support our ELL population. Some of the computer programs we use are Spelling City, Raz Kids, Imagine Learning and Discovery Education. These programs are used to support word study, reading, math, social studies, and science research. The students will be able to use these materials to help them learn within their grade levels in all the content areas. The resources are of various levels appropriate for their grade level and age. The computer programs that are used for academic intervention are personalized to students' needs based on initial pretests. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? The ENL teachers, teachers of the Dual Language program and paraprofessionals are fluent in other languages such as Italian, Spanish and Chinese which enable them to offer native language support to those who share the same language. The teachers are also able to assess students in reading and math in their native language. ELL students are also paired up with a buddy who speaks the same language in an effort to provide one on one assistance with tasks and instruction. Native language support is also provided through the use of reading books, dictionaries, glossaries and word list books in both English and their 2018-19 CEP 61  native languages. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. All required services and resources support and correspond to ELLs ages and grade levels. Required services are provided to students in groups according to their age and grade level. Age and grade appropriate resources are available to ELL students in their classroom as well as the ENL classroom and Resource Room. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? We do not share a building with any other schools. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). Newly arrived ELL students face unique challenges. As students join our school community as newcomers, ENL and classroom teachers seek to provide them with immediate support. Newly arrived ELLs are assigned “a buddy” who speaks the same native language and can help them get acquainted with our school community. Within the first week of school “buddies” will give newcomers a tour of the school, building confidence in their new environment. Our international bulletin board also provides a list of students who can translate for the newcomers and their parents. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? Language electives are not offered at our school. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? a) Our dual language program follows a self-contained model of instruction. The goal of our program is teach both native and non-native English speakers in two languages to develop bilingual fluency. Monolingual English-speaking students are immersed in Italian instruction alongside native speakers of Italian with limited English ability. ELL and EP students are integrated throughout the entire school day. b and c) Writing instruction and writing tasks allow for opportunities to use both languages. Mathematics and Science instruction is conducted in English with extension activities in Italian in order to build number sense, reasoning, and practice in Italian. Social Studies instruction is conducted in both Italian and English. Speaking and Listening is incorporated into all subject areas to meet grade level standards as well as develop language skills in both languages. d) Emergent literacy is taught using both languages in a 50/50 model, alternating the languages in the morning and afternoon. 2018-19 CEP 62  Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? All teachers, including those of ELL students, administrators and non-pedagogic staff will participate in professional development opportunities throughout the school year. In September, the entire staff is informed about our Language Translation and Interpretation Plan that explains the procedures for ensuring that Limited English Speaking parents are provided with a meaningful opportunity to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education. The staff is informed of all school-based personnel who can serve as translators and interpreters for parent notices, meetings, workshops and who can support ELL students when needed. Professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs, including ENL and bilingual teachers in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards. Workshops will be provided throughout the school year. This year we will continue our work with The Core Collaborative Professional Learning Network, focusing on student centered approaches to learning in reading and writing. We will continue our work with Carl Anderson, focusing on conferring with individual students during writing conferences and providing feedback to further their learning. Administrators will provide workshops on guided reading and how to effectively administer running records to assess students' reading levels. In mathematics, teachers will attend professional development workshops on effectively implementing our new math curriculum, Engage NY. All of our workshops incorporate strategies, different approaches and scaffolds to support teachers in differentiating instruction for all learners, addressing each individual student. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. As per CR Part-154.2, 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL specific professional development. This year, all teachers, including teachers of ELLs will receive professional development from the ELL Support Team at the Brooklyn South Field Support Center (BSFSC). These professional development workshops will take place during the allotted time on Mondays. Our teachers will also attend workshops offered through the BSFSC throughout the school year. The workshops will focus on language acquisition, integrating language and content instruction as well as collaborative teaching strategies to support diverse learners. Additionally, to support our Inquiry work, teachers will participate in grade-wide professional book studies. Teachers will work collaboratively reading and analyzing professional texts to make instructional decisions for target ELL populations. One professional text our teachers will use for their book study is, The 5 Components of Reading Development: A Classroom Teacher's Guide to Scaffolding Reading Instruction for ELL Students by Herrera, Perez and Kavimandan. Records are kept on file to keep track of teacher's mandated professional development hours. For example, when teachers return from an outside professional development workshop, they are required to submit a feedback form to administration highlighting what they've learned and what they will try to implement. Additionally, when the teachers attend in-house professional development workshops, the attendance records are kept on file. 2018-19 CEP 63  Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? Our school will provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals, language development progress, assessment results and language development needs in all content areas during the time designated on Tuesdays for parent engagement. Letters will be sent home in the parent's preferred language notifying them of the meeting and interpreters will be available for the meetings. During these meetings, assessment results in both native language and English Language will be discussed. Goals and instructional strategies will be provided to parents at this time. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. P.S. 112 strives to develop a close partnership with all parents, including parents of ELLs. We have a parent information board located at the main entrance of both buildings. The boards showcase all of the monthly opportunities for parents to participate in school activities. We have an active Parent Teacher Association with ELL parents represented as board members. Through PTA meetings held both in the mornings and in the evenings, we provide workshops and orientations. Interpreters are available for ELL parents at all workshops and meetings. Letters and notices are translated in parents' native languages. Our ELL parents are involved on the School Leadership Team and become part of the decision making process of the school. Our Parent Coordinator helps facilitate communication and involvement with ELL parents, as she conducts classes throughout the school year for parents to learn English. P.S. 112 hosts a number of school-wide family events each year such as Someone Special Dances, Family Fun Night and Movie Nights, providing our families with the opportunity to spend quality time together. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. 2018-19 CEP 64 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Louise Verdemare (Alfano), testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 CEP 65  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: Lefferts Park School DBN: 20K112 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Louise Alfano Title Principal Mary Kayser Assistant Principal Parent Coordinator Danielle Deneen ENL/Bilingual Teacher Stephanie Kuang Parent Donna Matarese Teacher/Subject Area Emanuela Shehu Teacher/Subject Area n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a Coach Coach School Counselor Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member n/a Other Other n/a Other n/a Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 06/28/18 06/28/18 06/28/18 06/28/18 06/28/18 06/28/18 n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a 2018-19 CEP 66  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 20K112 School Name: Lefferts Park Superintendent: K.Costantino The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this (*Primary) . . Maria Mary . Gaita Kayser . Parent Coordinator Assistant Principal . conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No . no no . . yes yes . * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. The school annually runs the Adult Preferred Language Report (RAPL) which indicates the preferred spoken and written languages of our parents and the Parent's Preferred Language Report (RCPL) which indicates the number and percentages of each language preferred by our parents. Home Language Identification Surveys (HLIS), Student Registration Forms and Emergency Contact Cards are also reviewed to assess the language needs of our parents. Additionally, parents are provided with surveys at the start of each school year to determine their language of choice. 2018-19 CEP 67  2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Albanian Arabic Chinese (Any) Cantonese French Italian Mandarin English Polish Portuguese Russian Spanish Urdu Ukranian Uzbek Vietnamese 1 24 200 0 1 2 0 324 2 1 12 145 11 3 4 1 0.14 3.28 27.36 0 0.14 0.27 0 44.32 0.27 0.14 1.64 19.84 1.5 0.41 0.55 0.14 1 23 174 16 1 3 15 318 2 1 11 146 10 5 4 1 0.14 3.15 23.8 2.19 0.14 0.41 2.05 43.5 0.27 0.14 1.5 19.97 1.37 0.68 0.55 0.14 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. Excluding Chinese, English and Spanish, there are no other languages spoken within our school community that represent a 10% population or more. Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families Parent-Teacher Conferences September, November, March and May Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. We use school-based personnel, DOE Translation and Interpretation Unit for covered languages and/or translation vendor for non-covered languages when needed. 2018-19 CEP 68  School Calendar Curriculum Letters ELL Entitlement/ Non-Entitlement and continuation letters Monthly Monthly We use school-based personnel. We use school-based personnel. Upon Entitlement Results We use DOE Intranet templates. PTA Meetings Monthly We use school-based personnel. Academic Progress and Goals October, February and May We use school-based personnel. Latchkey Services September Academic Intervention Services January We use school-based personnel, DOE Translation and Interpretation Unit for covered languages and/or translation vendor for non-covered languages when needed. We use school-based personnel. Extra-curricula Activities At the start of each program We use school-based personnel. Assemblies Family Functions Trips Monthly TBD TBD NYS Assessments March/April/May Open School Week November We use school-based personnel. We use school-based personnel. We use school-based personnel. We use school-based personnel, DOE Translation and Interpretation Unit for covered languages and/or translation vendor for non-covered languages when needed. We use school-based personnel, DOE Translation and Interpretation Unit for covered languages and/or translation vendor for non-covered languages when needed. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide Parent-Teacher Conferences including Parent Curriculum Night September, November, March and May Open School Week November ELL Parent Orientations Upon enrollment Parent Engagement Meetings and Workshops including additional meetings with ELL parents Weekly (varied throughout the year) PTA meetings Monthly interpretation service(s)? We use school-based personnel and over-the-phone interpretation services. We use school-based personnel. We use school-based personnel and over-the-phone interpretation services. We use school-based personnel and over-the-phone interpretation services. We use school-based personnel . 2018-19 CEP 69  3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. In the event of a school emergency, we will use our school-based personnel to assist with interpretation services for our limited-English-proficient families. When school-based personnel are unavailable, we will use the DOE Translation and Interpretation Unit as the number is readily programmed on our school land line phones as well as the cell phones of the school BRT members. The parent coordinator will also send out a phone blast to all families advising of the situation. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. The Language Access Coordinators will turnkey training as well as goals set forth by Chancellor's Regulation A-663 to all staff members during initial professional development workshops held in September of each school year. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) In compliance with Section VII of Chancellor’s Regulations A-663 regarding parental notification requirements for translation and interpretation services, parents will be provided with written notification at the beginning of the school year of their rights to receive such services and instructions on how to obtain them. Parents will receive a copy of the Parents' Bill of Rights addressing their rights to translation and interpretation services. In addition, the notice for parents regarding language assistance services will be posted in English as well as each of the covered languages on our Parent Information bulletin board located near the primary entrance of the school. The 2018-2019 School Safety Plan will identify procedures to ensure that language barriers will not interfere with limited and non-English speaking parents contacting the school’s administrative office in case of emergency. In the event in which parents of more than 10% of the children speak a primary language nor a covered language, the school will contact the Translation and Interpretation Unit for assistance. Parents will also be informed of the availability of the Department of Education’s website for further information. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? 2018-19 CEP 70  Our school will gather feedback from parents on the quality and availability of these services through parent surveys, individual conversations with parents and at PTA meetings. The Title I Parent Sub-Committee and the SLT meet on a monthly basis to gather parent feedback regarding available services. 2018-19 CEP 71 
