2018-19 COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (CEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 14K120 School Name: P.S. 120 CARLOS TAPIA Principal: LIZA CARABALLO 2018-19 CEP 1  Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 CEP 2  School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information School Number (DBN): 14K120 PS 120 14k120 PK - 5th grades 18 Beaver St, Brooklyn New York 11206 718-455-1000 Phone Number: 718-574-6637 Fax: L.Caraballo-Suarez lcaraba@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Email Address: L. Caraballo-Suarez W. Mogielnicki E. Navarrez Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: M. Alvarez A. Solis n/a n/a n/a Geographical District: 14 Superintendent’s Office Address: District Information A.Winnicki Superintendent: 215 Heyward Street, Brooklyn, New York 11206 awinnic@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718-302-7638 Phone Number: 718-302-7978 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) Brooklyn, District 14 B. Fitzgerald FSC: Executive Director: 2018-19 CEP 3  Executive Director’s Office Address: 131 Livingston Street, Brooklyn, New York 11201 bfitzge2@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 718-935-3954 Phone Number: 718-935-2382 Fax: 2018-19 CEP 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Liza Caraballo-Suarez Victor Mogielnicki Esther Navarrez A. Solis N/A N/A M. Alvarez K. Smith M. Munoz Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/Teacher/Chairperson Member/Teacher/Co-Chairperson Member/ Paraprofessional/Financial Liaison/Time Keeper 2018-19 CEP 5  R. Bittle- Milan L. Caquias H.Ordanez A. Long S. Gutierrez Janna Hanson LissyRosa Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Member/Para Member/ Teacher Member/Parent Member/ Parent Member/Parent Member/Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent/Reminder Member/ 2018-19 CEP 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with 2018-19 CEP 7  the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement 2018-19 CEP 8  Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? 1. Mission Statement: Public School 120 is committed to the pursuit of academic excellence and the positive social development of all of our students. We are dedicated to assisting every child to reach and surpass the Common Core Standards. Each child is seen as an individual with unique talents and abilities which need to be developed. We believe that all students should be in a rigorous academic program and involved in all school activities. We feel that enrichment is needed in order to engage every child. By promoting multicultural awareness and understanding 2018-19 CEP 9  through social studies and the arts, we hope to increase our students' understanding of their own and others' cultures. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. Each June, PS 120 celebrates its yearlong study of architecture, engineering, and design of world cultures with an Annual Multicultural Festival. The hallways are transformed into different countries and multi-disciplinary work is displayed, with an emphasis on the engineering, architectural, and design achievements of each culture. Students become tour guides and present the culture they have become specialists in. The students have gained knowledge through all aspects of the curriculum including; reading, writing, social studies, the arts, physical education, science, and technology, as well as after-school and in-school residencies. The diversity within our school has created a respectful, friendly and culturally-rich environment where the school community shares a variety of traditional celebrations and foods among the community's ethnic groups. Utilizing the Leader-In-Me Process, the students have embraced the "7 Habits of Happy Kids" to grow socially as they need to work cooperatively with their classmates and on a grade level to be successful in our Multicultural Festival. During the event students are inspired to interact and speak with visitors. This promotes self-confidence, responsibility, and trust. Students feel a sense of pride and success as they share their knowledge with their parents and the community. Through The Leader in Me process, students, families and teachers, are provided with a framework for strengthening social and emotional well-being. The entire school community embraces the " 7 Habits of Highly Effective People ." The teachers have embedded the habits, such as "be proactive" and "put first things first," into the daily curriculum, thus nurturing traits such as responsibility when students complete their work before they play. Students have opportunities to develop leadership roles in the Student Lighthouse Team, where they serve as advisors and contribute ideas to make the school a better place. Also, teachers facilitate each class to collaboratively develop individual class mission statements, thus promoting positive behavior throughout the school. Additionally, the parent coordinator conducts workshops and book clubs which focus on the 7 Habits of Highly Effective People . This provides families with successful academic and social-emotional strategies they can use with their children. In addition, to continue to attempt to promote the importance of health, we have also partnered with NYU, Cornell University and Woodhull hospital. Students and parents have attended different types of health workshops which have provided an abundance of information. For example, prior to these workshops, a high percentage of student absences were due to asthma. Now, students as well as parents have been trained to recognize the onset of an attack and have been provided with strategies to prevent one from occurring. The families understand that keeping a child at home because of asthma is not always necessary. Hence, our attendance yearly rate has increased. As we all know that it takes more than just academic skills to prepare a student for the challenges of life. The school has provided all early childhood families with Cool Culture memberships. Our families are able to freely visit and enjoy New York City’s 90 cultural institutions. Families are able to experience hands-on learning which enhances their academic abilities. The Afro Latin Jazz Alliance, and Kinderdance have been incorporated to reinforce students’ learning of the instruments and dances that have cultivated and contributed to different music around the world . 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. 2018-19 CEP 10  The school is located in an economically challenged neighborhood. It serves free lunch to all students. Seventeen percent of the students are English Language Learners. Of the students that are English Language Learners, 13% are entering, 28% are emerging, 38% are transitioning, and 20% are expert. Twenty percent are considered students with special needs. Of the students with special needs 38% are receiving full-time services, 41% are receiving part-time services, and 20% receive only related services. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. The school made progress in student achievement in both ELA and Math as measured by state and local measures. This year the school plans on building on last year's instructional focus by continuing to implement and develop reciprocal teaching strategies across all grades and curricula, and to further develop the use of guided reading to strengthen the literacy of our young readers. Additionally, the school will continue to focus on further developing pedagogical practices in 3b: Questioning and Discussion techniques. 2018-19 CEP 11  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 14K120 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration PK,0K,01,02,03,04,05 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 415 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 39 37 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 42 19 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 87.0% % Attendance Rate 86.7% % Reduced Lunch 15.2% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.5% 74.9% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 2.9% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 16.06 0% 3% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 42.0% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 84% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A YES N/A YSH YES Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A YES N/A YSH NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A YES N/A N/A YES High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 3 3 91.9% 0.2% 21.7% 19.0% 1.9% 1.2% 2 12% 6.3 41.9% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No N/A N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A NO N/A N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 CEP 12  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Literacy: The New York State ELA data from 2017 to 2018 shows an increase of 6% of students performing at level 3 or level 4 (from 36% to 42%). The percentage of students performing at level 2 remained at 30%, while the percentage of students performing at level 1 decreased by 6%. This is in contrast to the results of the previous year, in which the New York State ELA data from 2016 to 2017 showed a decrease of 1% of students performing at level 3 and level 4. The percentage of students performing at level 2 decreased by 8%, and the percentage of students performing at level 1 increased by 10%. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Implementation of reciprocal teaching strategies and guided reading in order to increase students’ literacy abilities, so that by June 2019, 80% of students in grades k-5 will move two or more reading levels, as measured by Fountas & Pinnell running records. 2018-19 CEP 13  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Implementation of reciprocal teaching strategies school-wide. Departmentalization in, 4 th and 5 th grades to focus on deepening the quality and rigor of instruction. Fountas & Pinnell running records and miscue analysis are used to most effectively inform general classroom and intervention instruction, in order to differentiate reading instruction. Administration, Instructional Coach, and Specialists are providing ongoing staff development of the programs Ready Gen , Teacher’s College writing curriculum, and GoMath. Collaboratively, teachers are modifying the programs and units of study to meet the needs of their individual students by utilizing UDL strategies and differentiated instruction. Teacher teams will continue to explore and investigate the modification Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? September 2018 - June 2019. All staff, administration, instructional coach, and consultants. September 2018 - June 2019. 4th and 5 th grade teachers, paraprofessionals, administration, instructional coach and consultants. September, January, and May 2019 Classroom teachers Kindergarten to 5 th grade, and instructional coach. September 2018 - June 2019. All staff, administration, instructional coach, and consultants. All students, Pre-K to 5 th grades, including English language learners and students with disabilities. 4 th and 5 th grade students, including English language learners, and students with disabilities. All students, Pre-K to 5th grade, including English language learners, and students with disabilities. All students, including English language learners and students with disabilities. 2018-19 CEP 14 of curriculum maps, learning targets and reflect on revisions/re-developments needed for formative assessments Administration, instructional coach, and consultants are providing professional development throughout the year regarding the delivery of guided reading instruction to all classroom teachers. Program will include coaching and modeling from consultants, and an online course completed by teachers. Implementation of WritingCity writing curriculum in grades K to 3. Curriculum provides instructional components in composition, grammar, language acquisition, and vocabulary. Program includes staff development for teachers. September 2018 - June 2019. Classroom teachers Kindergarten to 5 th grade, and instructional coach. September 2018 - June 2019. Classroom teachers Kindergarten to 3rd grade, and instructional coach. All students, K to 5 th grades, including English language learners and students with disabilities. All students, K to 3rd grades, including English language learners and students with disabilities. Conduct parent education workshops on literacy strategies and resources to help families with their children's literacy skills. All families, Pre-k to 5. September 2018-2019 Parent Coordinator 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Conduct parent education workshops on literacy strategies and resources to help families with their children's literacy skills. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. The school will provide professional development through a combination of outside consultants and in-house staff with varied areas of expertise. The school will continue to build upon existing structures for assessment, collaborative data inquiry, and intervention, as well as provide after-school programs that build and enrich students' academic skills. Specific programs and practices include:  Outside consultants from Southern Cross Consultancy and LitLife to develop staff reciprocal teaching and guided reading competencies.  Ready Gen, Teacher's College Writing, WritingCity and Go Math curriculum, modified by P.S. 120 staff.  Regular data inquiry meetings to assess and monitor effectiveness of instruction.  Ongoing professional development will be provided by the administration, instructional coach, the Southern Cross Consultancy, LitLife, and specialists for all teachers focusing on assessment, looking at students' work, classroom environments, intervention and comprehension strategies, sequence of development of concepts 2018-19 CEP 15   in all strands, differentiation, writing mathematically, and implementation of classroom walk-throughs with all teachers based on Professional Teaching Standards. Intervention Services will be provided to target at-risk students, determined by running records and miscue analysis, comprehension rubrics, New York State ELA/Math, teacher recommendations, Words Their Way Spelling Inventory, Writing on Demand pieces, GoMath Unit assessments, Benchmark assessments, and summative unit assessments.  Two after-school programs will be provided to support the students’ academic needs (ELA/Math Institute and ESL after-school program).  Afro-Latin Jazz and Kinderdance will provide enrichment opportunities and academic support for students. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind X Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal.  Fountas & Pinnell Reading Levels tracked three times a year. The second administration of the running records will act as a mid-point bench mark, at which point 80% of students should have moved 1 or more reading level.  ReadyGen independent practice activities are assessed in order to differentiate instruction and student writing is assessed using rubrics. Summative assessments at the end of each unit will also be used as assessment tools.  Administration will meet in cycles with teachers in order to evaluate understanding of CCLS and provide next steps in order to continue to deepen staff understanding of Response to Intervention NYS Principles and Model, as applied to Tier 1 daily classroom instruction and Tier 2 and Tier 3 intervention work. The CCLS aligned programs, ReadyGen and Go Math will be utilized in grades K – 5th. These programs provide support for meeting students’ individual needs.  NYC Performance Assessment twice a year for grades K-2 and Grades 3-5 will use a Baseline Assessment in the fall and Benchmark Assessments in the winter and spring. Writing-On-Demand exercises are administered 3 times a year, as well as end-of-unit writing assessments (“published pieces”) to assess student writing abilities.  ENL and Literacy/Math after-school programs' effectiveness will be monitored by teacher-developed assessments within each program.  Data inquiry teams/grade-level teams will gather and analyze data on a weekly basis.  Effectiveness of reciprocal teaching will be monitored through observations and the data inquiry process. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) Data from Fountas & Pinnell Reading Levels will be used to measure progress. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 16  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? An analysis of attendance data indicates that attendance has remained above 90% for the prior eight years. Our attendance rate remains higher than those of similar city schools. Attendance data indicates that the number of students with 16 or more absences has been declining over the past few years. Most of these students are in grades PK-2. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. To continue to foster a school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers, as measured by student attendance above 90% by the ending of the school year 2018-2019. 2018-19 CEP 17  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). AIDP Family worker reviews daily ATS attendance and lateness reports and shares data with Attendance Committee. The committee will meet with the parents of students with excessive absences, in order to formulate an individualized attendance plan. Minutes of all Attendance meetings are taken and signed by parents and committee members 100% class attendance is celebrated by the school community, to encourage and reward attendance. High student individual attendance is celebrated by the school community Special activities are arranged to encourage attendance on half-days, days before holidays, and other identified low attendance days. The attendance committee plans special activities such as “School Spirit Days” 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All students. September 2018- June 2019. Attendance Committee All students. September 2018- June 2019. All students. September 2018 - June 2019 All students. September 2018 - June 2019. Attendance Committee. All staff and administration All staff and administration. How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. On the premises we have a 5 day school guidance counselor and 5 day psychologist. Plus a 3 day social worker to provide parental resources within and outside the neighborhood. In addition, we have a Leader In Me program to help support the social and emotional component of the children and parents. A parent coordinator holds weekly workshops which includes, but not limited to, academic purposes only. Correspondence are sent home in families native language to promote participation throughout the school. The administration frequently monitors students attendance and Identifies children with chronic absences. Principal or AP then meets with the needed family to again identify and support parents' needs. The ongoing cycle of getting families involved in different capacities will occur from September 2018 to June 2019. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 2018-19 CEP 18   AIDP Family worker reviews daily ATS attendance and lateness reports and organizes Attendance Committee meetings.  Attendance celebrations are rewarded as attendance incentives to the classes with the highest attendance each month. The Leader in Me program has enhanced students to take ownership of their learning, which promotes positive school culture and increases student moral. Students with high attendance are acknowledged during annual awards assembly. The Leader in Me program has enhanced students to take ownership of their learning, which promotes positive school culture and increases student moral.   Teacher teams collaboratively plan such activities as Spirit Weeks/Days, Pajama Day, Crazy Hat Day, Color Mania, and student-staff basket-ball game. Character Craze Day is designed for students to attend school on October 31 st (identified as a low attendance day) Staff will be responsible for the implementation and maintenance for their grade-level reward systems  Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 1. Attendance above 90% will be maintained and 5% improvement of students with 16+ absences, as indicated by ATS attendance. 2. 100% class attendance is noted and rewarded. 3. Individual student attendance of 100% is acknowledged and celebrated. 4. AIDP Family worker will review attendance via ATS attendance reports. 5. Daily attendance and punctuality will be monitored daily and assessed at the end of each marking period Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Attendance data from ATS will be reviewed by the Attendance Committee to assess attendance rates. Overall school attendance rate should be at or above 90% by mid-year assessment in January. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 19  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Based on 2017-2018 collaborative teacher team analysis of student responses to mathematical exemplars, there was a need to improve students' problem solving and communication skills and help develop students' critical thinking and reasoning skills. 67% of students in grades 3-5 performed at a level 3 or 4 on "Exemplar" problem solving tasks during the 2018-2019 school year. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 70% of students in grades 3-5 will score a level 3 or 4 on an Exemplar, centered around mathematical problem solving. 2018-19 CEP 20  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Implementation of reciprocal teaching in math school wide to focus on effective problem solving strategies. Departmentalization in 4th and 5th grades to focus on deepening the quality and rigor of instruction. Exemplars are used to assess students mathematical problem solving and communication skills and help students develop critical thinking and reasoning skills. Use of Mathletics in grades K-5 to improve math fluencies, to aid in accuracy and speed of execution of problem solving. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? September 2018- June 2019 All staff, administration, and consultants. September, 2018- June 2019. 2nd, 3rd, 4th and 5th grade teachers, paraprofessionals, administration and consultants. Classroom teachers Kindergarten- 5th grade. One Exemplar per month. September 2018 -June2019. September 2018- June 2019. Classroom teachers, technology teachers, Kindergarten- 5th grade. All students, Pre-K - 5th grade, including English language learners and students with disabilities. 2nd, 3rd, 4th and 5th grade students, including English language learners and students with disabilities. All students. Kindergarten -5th grade, including English language learners and students with disabilities. All students. Kindergarten -5th grade, including English language learners and students with disabilities. 2018-19 CEP 21  Administration and consultants are providing ongoing professional development of Go Math, Reciprocal Teaching and Problem Solving Strategies. Collaboratively, teachers are modifying the curriculum to meet the needs of their individual students by utilizing UDL strategies and differentiated instruction. Teacher teams will continue to use common planning time to explore and investigate the modifications of curriculum maps, learning targets and reflect revisions for exemplars. September 2018- June 2019. All staff, administration, and consultants, All students. Kindergarten -5th grade, including English language learners and students with disabilities. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. During the school year 2018-2019, a series of workshops will be facilitated by the parent coordinator to support parents when interacting with their child's teacher during parent teacher conference, promotional criteria meetings, or departmentalization concerns. In additions a selected group of teachers will also provide a few workshops to demonstrate to parents how to replicate and reinforce school work at home. This will include topics such as selected new generation standards as well as subject rubrics. Each Tuesday afternoon parents will also have the opportunities to meet with their child's teacher to focus on areas of needs. The teachers will maintain a log on site. Parent Coordinator will gather data on a monthly basis. All workshops will be bilingual. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Outside consultants from Southern Cross Consultancy to develop staff fluency with exemplars and reciprocal teaching competencies . Go Math curriculum modified by P.S. 120 staff. Mathletics software used bt classroom teachers and the technology teacher. Regular data inquiry meetings to assess and monitor effectiveness of instruction. Ongoing professional development will be provided by the administration, Southern Cross Consultancy, and specialists for all teachers, focusing on assessment, looking at student work, classroom environment, intervention and comprehension strategies, sequence of development of concepts in all strands, differentiation, writing mathematically, and implementation of classroom walk-throughs with all teachers based of Professional Teaching Standards. 2018-19 CEP 22  Interventions Services will be provided to target at-risk students, determined by NYS ELA/Math, teacher recommendations, Go Math Unit assessment, Benchmark Assessments, Writing on demand pieces, running records and miscue analysis, comprehension rubrics. Two after-school programs will be provided to support students' academic needs (ELA/Math Institute and ESL after-school program). CBO after school programs, Afro-Latin Jazz Academy and Kinderdance will provide enrichment opportunities and academic support for students. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Exemplars will be tracked three times a year. It is expected that in February 2019 54% of student's in grades 3-5 will score a level 3 or 4 on Exemplars. Administration will meet in cycles with teachers in order to evaluate understanding of CCLS and provide next steps. Continue to deepen staff understanding of Response to Intervention NYS Principles and Model, as applied to Tier 1 daily classroom instruction and Tier 2 and Tier 3 intervention work. The CCLS aligned programs, Go Math and ReadyGen will be utilized in grades K-5. These programs provide support for meeting students' individual needs. NYC Performance Assessment twice a year (Grades K-2) and Grades 3-5 will use a baseline assessment in the fall and benchmark assessments in the winter and spring. Writing on Demand exercises are administered three times a year, as well as end-of-unit writing assessments ("published pieces") to assess student writing abilities. Reading and writing assessments are being taken into consideration when monitoring math problem solving proficiency, as literacy ability can impact student performance on Exemplar tasks. ESL and Literacy/Math after-school programs effectiveness will be monitored by teacher developed assessments within each program. 2018-19 CEP 23  The Afro-Latin Jazz and Kinderdance will be measured through analysis of student performance on class-level, school-wide, and State-wide assessments. Data inquiry teams will gather and analyze data on a weekly basis. Effectiveness of reciprocal teaching will be monitored through observations and the data inquiry process. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Exemplars will be used to measure progress. Exemplars administered in February will serve as a mid-year benchmark, as mentioned above. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 24  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Based upon Advance data, most teachers rate highly effective in Domain 2 - Classroom Environment and in Domain 4 - Professional Responsibilities. After review of Advance data for Domain 3 - Instruction, specifically 3B - Questioning and Discussion Techniques, we determined a need to focus on this component. Feedback from the Instructional Cabinet, as well as from teacher one-to-one conferences has shown that all teachers wish to become stronger in this area. The school's instructional focus supports growth in this domain, "If teachers model effective reciprocal learning strategies in all curriculum areas, then students' comprehension skills will increase as written and verbal responses and reflections." Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, a 7% growth in teachers improving one performance level on component 3b - Questioning and Discussion Techniques as reflected by teacher observations tracked in Advance. 2018-19 CEP 25 Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All students, PK to 5th grades September 2018- June 2019 All staff, administration, and consultants. 2nd - 5th grade students September 2018- June 2019 All students, PK to 5th grades September 2018- June 2019 2nd, 3rd, 4th and 5th grade teachers, paraprofessionals, administration and consultants. Administration and consultants. Teachers October 2018 - June 2019 All teachers, administration, and consultants. Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Implementation of reciprocal teaching strategies school wide. Departmentalization in 4th and 5th grades to focus on deepening the quality and rigor of instruction. Administration, instructional coach, and specialists are providing ongoing staff development focusing on enhancing Questioning and Discussion Techniques which enhance the school's curriculum. Teacher teams will continue to explore and investigate the modification of curriculum maps, learning targets and reflect on revisions/re-developments needed for formative assessments. Teachers will conduct Learning Walks and peer-to-peer observations with a focus on questioning and discussion techniques, providing actionable feedback. School leaders will observe teachers, providing feedback and support to enhance teachers' abilities with questioning and discussion techniques. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. During the School year 2018-2019, parents will be encouraged to participate in the PTA and school leadership committee. Periodically invite parents to school-wide and grade-wide events, classroom activities to promote parent 2018-19 CEP 26  as partners. In addition, through the Leader In Me process create a parent component in which parents can facilitate several workshops to help other parents as well. Administration will be transparent throughout the school year. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc.  Ongoing professional development will be provided by the administration, the Southern Cross Consultancy, Generation Ready, and Specialists to develop staff reciprocal teaching competencies.  Ready Gen, Teacher's College Writing, and Go Math curriculum, modified by P.S. 120 staff.  Regular data inquiry meetings to assess and monitor effectiveness of instruction.  Scheduling of weekly common planning periods for grade-level teams, and monthly Vertical Team meetings. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019 6% of teachers will increase one performance level in Danielson component 3B, according to observation data. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Review of Advance data, and teacher feedback will be used to assess progress. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 27  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Strength: The school has a core of dedicated parents who support the school at multiple events and functions. Need: To continue to increase the amount of parent participation throughout the school year. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, parent participation will increase by 5% at workshops, meetings, school wide activities and parent/teacher conferences. 2018-19 CEP 28  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? To provide translated correspondence on school news, information, and issues in all languages used in the school community. Families To increase attendance at parent meetings by increasing the frequency of communication , such as Parent/Teacher Conference, Literacy Celebrations, Pre-K open house, orientation and workshops. Families To increase parent knowledge of curriculum through various workshops and events (i.e. writing celebrations). The Parent Coordinator will identify and communicate to principal, parents and the school community concerns, so that we may ensure issues are addressed in a timely and satisfactory manner. To identify and address the needs of students and their family through outreach by the Pre-K family worker and social worker. Families To sustain parent membership on the school leadership team by distribution of leadership roles. Families September 2018 - June 2019. September 2018 - June 2019 September 2018 - June 2019 Parent Coordinator, Community Liaison, Administration and Staff. Parent Coordinator, Community Liaison, Administration and Staff. Parent Coordinator, Community Liaison, Administration and Staff. September 2018- June 2019. Parent Coordinator, Community Liaison, Administration and Staff. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. Through the Empire After school program and Kinderdance will continue to support our families and the school community. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 1. All correspondence will be translated for the school community. Notices and postings for parents will also be translated. Translators will be provided during parent meetings. 2. Multiple Parent workshops will be conducted by the parent coordinator and teachers in order to assist parents with accessing and interrupting their children’s data. Grade Level Curriculum Nights addressed specific grade-level 2018-19 CEP 29  standards and expectations. Parents as Reading Partners Book Club introduced literacy strategies to support parents’ ability to address their child learning goals. Participating parents received books in English and their native language. Transition Workshops will supply parents with information and materials to support their children’s transition to the next grade. Early childhood parents will be provided with COOL Culture memberships that enable the family to visit cultural intuitions in support of the school’s curriculum. Mother-Son and Father-Daughter dances foster a stronger home-school connection. 3. Allocate funds for School Leadership parents to participate in educational conferences and workshops. SLT parents will turnkey information to Leadership Team and P.T.A. members. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, parent involvement in school activities shows a 2% increase, by looking at the following information: 1. Parent surveys are conducted twice a year. Parent Coordinator’s binder will included translated notices. 2. Parent Coordinator’s binder contains family activities, evaluations and parental requests. Attendance of programs and clubs are tracked weekly through the Weekly Parent Coordinator Activity Report 3. School Leadership Parents, as well as all parents will be trained to interpret both formal and informal school data reports (i.e. attendance reports, school report card, progress report, parent survey) 4. An increase in attendance as reflected in the Parent/Teacher Conference log throughout the year. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Parent attendance data and parent surveys will be used to assess progress. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 30  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Intervention Services will be provided to target at-risk students, determined by running records and miscue analysis, comprehension rubrics, NYS ELA, teacher recommendations, Words Their Way Spelling Inventory, Writing on Demand pieces, Benchmark assessments. Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) TheFundationsProgram is utilized during the school day for grades K-3. During the school day, students in grades 4-5 receive ELA intervention. The After-School Literacy/Math Institute will meet during the months of January – May, twice a week The Saturday Literacy/Math Academy will meet on scheduled Saturdays during the months of January – May TheFundationsProgram and Guided Reading is utilized by grades K-3 to provide extra support for phonics vocabulary, and grammar instruction. Grades K-3 rd will receive ELA intervention utilizing theFundationsProgram and guided reading, provided as small-group instruction. Grades 4 and 5 will receive ELA intervention provided as small-group instruction, during the school day. At-risk students in grades 2, 3, 4, and 5 are offered the After-School Literacy/Math Institute which will provide small-group and one-to-one support. At-risk students in grades 3, 4, and 5 are offered the Saturday Literacy/Math Academy which will provide small-group and one-to-one support. Grades 4-5 receive ELA intervention using guided reading and writing. Words Their Way Literacy Activities and Games are used to provide extra support for phonics, vocabulary, and grammar instruction. An After-School Literacy/Math Institute for at-risk students in grades 2, 3, 4, and 5 will provide extra help to improve reading, writing and math skills. A Saturday Literacy/Math Academy for at-risk students in grades 3, 4, and 5 will provide extra help to improve reading, writing and math skills. 2018-19 CEP 31 K-5 th grade students Math instructional games and activities to support math fluencies During the Extended-day program, students in grades K-5 receive math intervention using the workshop method. games are utilized Literacy/Math Institute for at-risk students in grades 3, 4, and 5 will provide extra help to improve reading, writing and math skills. During the months of January – April, the program will meet twice a week. A Saturday Literacy/Math Academy for at-risk students in grades 3, 4, and 5 will provide extra help to improve reading, writing and math skills. Teachers provide Science intervention through the teaching of reading, writing, and mathematics in the content areas . During the school day, students in grades K-5 receive math intervention using the workshop method. During the school day, students in grades K-5 receive math intervention using the workshop method. An After-School Literacy/Math Institute for at-risk students in grades 3, 4, and 5 will provide extra help to improve reading, writing and math skills. During the months of January – April, the program will meet twice a week. An After-School Literacy/Math Institute for at-risk students in grades 3, 4, and 5 will provide extra help to improve reading, writing and math skills. During the months of January – May, the program will meet twice a week. The Saturday Literacy/Math Academy will meet on scheduled Saturdays during the months of January – May At-risk students ingrades 3, 4, and 5 are offered the Saturday Literacy/Math Academy which will provide small-group and one-to-one support. Science intervention is provided on-to-one and small group as needed. Science intervention is provided during the school day and during the after-school programs. Mathematics Intervention Services will be provided to target at-risk students, determined by NYS Math exam, teacher recommendations, GoMath Unit assessments, Exemplar tasks, and Benchmark assessments. Science Intervention Services will be provided to target at-risk students, determined by running records and miscue analysis, comprehension rubrics, NYS ELA/Math and Science, teacher recommendations, Words Their Way Spelling Inventory, Writing on Demand pieces, GoMath Unit assessments, Exemplar tasks, Benchmark assessments. 2018-19 CEP 32 Intervention Services will be provided to target at-risk students, determined by running records and miscue analysis, comprehension rubrics, NYS ELA/Math, teacher recommendations, Words Their Way Spelling Inventory, Writing on Demand pieces, GoMath Unit assessments, Exemplar tasks, Benchmark assessments. PPT review of student academic progress and social behavior. Determined by medical doctor’s diagnoses of asthma. Social Studies At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Teachers provide Social Studies intervention through the teaching of reading, writing, and mathematics in the content areas. Social Studies intervention is provided on-to-one and small group as needed . Social Studies intervention is provided during the school day ad during the after-school programs. At-risk counseling is provided as one-to one and small group sessions. At-risk counseling is provided throughout the school as needed, during the school day. Asthma Workshops are provided in small group sessions by the school nurse. Asthma workshops take place during the school day . Individual and group counseling is offered to students on the short term basis of six weeks. Services are provided with parental consent, during the school day. The Nurse provides a series of Asthma Workshops, throughout the school year for students, whom have been diagnosed with asthma. 2018-19 CEP 33  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) Currently, PS 120 has about 95 students who are in Temporary Housing. 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. Once the students in temporary housing are identified, STIT liaison focuses on the immediate needs of individual. The school counselor, STIT liaison, uses individual and group counseling as well as consultation to provide proactive and responsive services. Responsive services ensure appropriate and timely responses to academic, personal-social concerns and career concerns and are available to every student. The above services are often initiated through self-referral, teachers, staff, and parents who may refer students for assistance. The school additionally connects the students to Title I services and provides help with school uniforms, school supplies, books, and field trips in order to guide students towards individual growth. Referrals to other school support services or community resources are provided as well on as needed basis. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). n/a 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 CEP 34  n/a 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. n/a 2018-19 CEP 35  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. Currently, 97% of the staff is highly qualified. If staff is identified as not highly qualified, the Administration will meet with them in order to develop a educational plan to fulfill their license requirements. In addition, the teachers will be sent to a New York City evaluator to support their educational plan. They will be assigned a mentor. Staff will be provided with high quality professional development. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). 1. Ongoing Professional Development will be provided by the Administration, for all staff members focusing on assessment, looking at students' work, intervention and comprehension strategies, sequence of development of concepts in all strands, differentiation, writing mathematically, action research study to align data to instruction through intensive planning for and implementation of effective teaching and learning strategies for specific children based on data analysis. Staff development with a focus on using non-fiction running records and miscue analysis to most effectively inform general classroom and intervention instruction, in order to differentiate reading instruction 2. Ongoing Professional Development will be provided by the Administration and the Math Consultant, for all staff members focusing on assessment, looking at students' work, classroom environments, intervention and comprehension strategies, sequence of development of concepts in all strands, differentiation, writing mathematically, implementation of Classroom Walk throughs with all teachers based on Professional Teaching Standards Professional development with teachers “ Looking At Student Work ” collaboratively to build further understanding of aligning data to instruction – using Writing samples and rubrics, using Mathematics Open Response and Exemplars samples and rubrics. As well Professional development to focus on assessment, looking at students work, classroom environments, intervention and comprehension strategies, sequence of development of concepts in all strands, differentiation, writing mathematically, implementation of Classroom Walk throughs with all teachers based on Professional Teaching Standards (Engagement & Classroom Environments), integration of Math resources with daily lessons including test prep with technology. Part 3: TA Schools Only 2018-19 CEP 36  3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. n/a 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). n/a Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). Transition into Pre-Kindergarten: Our pre-kindergarten program is presented to parents each spring during an open house, conducted by the pre-kindergarten family worker and the early childhood social worker. The social worker also visits community based organizations to provide information that will support the children ’ s transition into pre-k. During registration, parent interviews are conducted in order to support the child ’ s transition into school. During Parent Orientation, teachers present the pre-k curricula and units of study, and explain student expectations. Teachers formally update parents throughout the year on student growth during the school ’ s two parent-teacher conferences. Early childhood parents are provided with COOL Culture membership, which enables and encourages families to visit cultural intuitions in support of the school ’ s curriculum. Transition workshops supply parents with information and materials to support their children ’ s transition to the next grade. Collaboratively, the early childhood social worker and parent coordinator provide parents with information and resources on early childhood intervention. Transition into Kindergarten: Each Spring, pre-kindergarten and kindergarten teachers collaboratively plan transition activities for students and their parents. At the pre-kindergarten to kindergarten transition workshop, kindergarten teachers present clear student expectations. To increase the home-school connection, parents are provided with a transition backpack containing books and literacy activities in order to facilitate summer learning and support students transition into kindergarten. Additionally, parents are provided with Internet based resources to increase school readiness. Students will take a “ walking trip ” to visit the kindergarten classrooms, while counting “ how many steps to my new classroom. ” Kindergarten teachers will frequently visit the Pre-kindergarten classrooms, so that students will get to know them and decrease student stress when moving to next grade. 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. 2018-19 CEP 37  Multiple grade-level inquiry teams have been constructed to analysis student data using multiple assessments to synthesize and utilize the information to develop an action plan to be implemented on a sample of students. These teams meet on a weekly basis. In order to strengthen students ’ transition and teachers ’ collaboration, cross grade-level inquiry teams meet to review inquiry work on a monthly basis. Relevant findings are shared with the school community. Teacher teams collaboratively develop whole school, grade level specific balanced formative and summative assessments, schedule aligned to yearly scope and sequence within the marking periods. Facilitate “ Looking at Student Work ” sessions, through protocols to build consistency of judgments with CCLS rubrics and build consistency of understanding of Math Content and Math practices. Develop rubrics to align to performance tasks of rubrics, inclusive of Math Content and Math Practices strands 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) 342,246.00 55,444.00 12,366.00 n/a 2,531,994.00 x x x x x Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Column B Section Reference(s) 5.A thru5E, 8 5A 5c 5a 5c 5e 5a 5c 5e 6 5a5b5c,5d,5e.6.7.8 Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual 2018-19 CEP 38  identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 CEP 39  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Public School 120 Parent Involvement Policy (PIP) BELIEF Public School 120 is deeply committed to involving parents in all aspects of our children’s Education. Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. A good working relationship between the school and home will motivate every child to reach his or her potential. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in our school. Therefore, P.S. 120, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between our school and the families. GOALS Our school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of our school community. Our school will support parents and families of Title I students by: ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; 2018-19 CEP 40  ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child ’ s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of our school community; Our school ’ s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. Our school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of our school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school ’ s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school ’ s Parent-Teacher Association, as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, our school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school ’ s Title I program as outlined in the Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school ’ s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to schools to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in our Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent-Teacher Association and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator staff will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend our school and will work to ensure that our school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability grade-level curriculum and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents ’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSAState accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, Progress Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; 2018-19 CEP 41  ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school ’ s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the ESSA; ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings, with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school ’ s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; Our school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: 1. holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Meeting; 2. hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; 3. encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent-Teacher Association and Title I Parent Committee; 4. supporting or hosting Family Day events; 5. establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; 6. hosting events to support, men asserting leadership in education for their children. parents/guardians, grandparents and foster parents; 7. encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; 8. providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children ’ s progress; 9. providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between the teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand; Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students Our school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of our school community. Our school will support parents and families of Title I students by: ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; 2018-19 CEP 42  ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child ’ s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of our school community; Our school ’ s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. Our school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of our school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school ’ s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school ’ s Parent-Teacher Association, as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, our school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school ’ s Title I program as outlined in the Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school ’ s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to schools to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; 2018-19 CEP 43  ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in our Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent-Teacher Association and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator staff will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend our school and will work to ensure that our school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability grade-level curriculum and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents ’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, Progress Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school ’ s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the ESSA; ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings, with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school ’ s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; Our school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of our school community. Our school will support parents and families of Title I students by: 2018-19 CEP 44  ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child ’ s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of our school community; Our school ’ s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. Our school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of our school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school ’ s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school ’ s Parent-Teacher Association, as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, our school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school ’ s Title I program as outlined in the Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school ’ s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; 2018-19 CEP 45  ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to schools to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in our Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support schoollevel committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent-Teacher Association and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator staff will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend our school and will work to ensure that our school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability grade-level curriculum and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents ’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, Progress Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school ’ s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the ESSA; ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings, with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school ’ s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; 2018-19 CEP 46  Parental Involvement and School Quality  providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math and use of technology;  providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and  decision making in support of the education of their children; fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child ’ s progress;  providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments;  sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand;  providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parent to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of our school community; Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement  maintain a Parent Coordinator to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator staff will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend our school and will work to ensure that our school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability grade-level curriculum and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents ’ capacity to help their children at home;   provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, Progress Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report;  host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school ’ s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the ESSA; schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings, with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school ’ s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed;   School-Parent Compact School-Parent Compact (SPC) P.S. 120, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for 2018-19 CEP 47  improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State ’ s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child ’ s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school ’ s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child ’ s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; 2018-19 CEP 48  Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child ’ s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child ’ s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; Provide general support to parents by: 1. creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; 2. assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child ’ s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); 3. sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering will all members of the school community; 4. supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; 5. ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; 6. advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department ’ s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Elementary Secondary Education Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities: ● monitor my child ’ s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; 2018-19 CEP 49  ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child ’ s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child ’ s education; ● communicate with my child ’ s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school ’ s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; III. Student Responsibilities: ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. School Responsibilities I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State ’ s Standards and Assessments by: 2018-19 CEP 50  ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child ’ s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school ’ s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child ’ s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child ’ s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child ’ s class, and to observe classroom activities; 2018-19 CEP 51  ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; Provide general support to parents by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents 1. creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; 2. assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child ’ s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); 3. sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering will all members of the school community; 4. supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; 5. ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; 6. advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department ’ s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Elementary and Secondary Education Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; Parent/Guardian Responsibilities: II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child ’ s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child ’ s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child ’ s education; 2018-19 CEP 52  ● communicate with my child ’ s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school ’ s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 2018-19 CEP 53  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 2018-19 CEP 54  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information 3 2 1 Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: After School Program: To ensure that our ELL students increase academic achievement and perform at levels 2, 3, and 4 on the New York State English Language Arts exam in the Spring of 2019, as well as on the NYSESLAT in May 2019 our school will be providing an ENL after-school program in grades first - fifth. Our plan is to support all ELL students to reach proficiency scores on the NYSESLAT through the use of strategic differentiation methods according to their area of need, Listening/Speaking or Reading/Writing. According to the results of the 2018 NYSESLAT, the majority of our students reaching proficiency need extra support in the modalities of reading and writing. Three classes will be devoted to grades first to fifth. The three classes will be comprised of about 60 students. The program will meet Wednesdays, from 2:30 - 4:30. The program is scheduled from December 7, 2018 to May 17, 2019. There will be approximately 20 sessions. All instruction will be conducted in English. A structured ENL program is essential and an integral component of an ELL student's educational program. The three classes will be divided by grade level. The first teacher (group A) will work with 1st grade students ( 20 students). The second teacher (group B) will work with students in grades 2nd and 3rd (20 students). The third teacher (group C) will work with students in grades 4th and 5th (20 students). All three classes will focus on language acquisition, language development and preparation for the NYSESLAT. All after-school classes will be instructed in English, (as the school does not have a Bilingual program, the school only has an ENL program). Dictionary and visual aids are used in order to support the home language. The teachers instructing in the ENL after-school program include ENL teachers and a highly-qualified Common Branch teacher, whom is also certified in ENL. All teachers have received the 7.5 hours of ELL training as per Jose P. The primary focus of the program will be the development of English literacy skills, increasing academic language. Instructional practices and lesson design of the ENL program include: ** Teaching to the ENL language proficiency and content standards. ** Integrating language teaching with the teaching of curricular content. ** Collaborating to make content language of the classroom comprehensible. ** Customizing the learning environment to meet individual language needs. ** Providing explicit instruction in learning strategies and complex thinking skills. **Providing research based explicit instruction in reading comprehension. **Students are grouped by grade level and proficiency level. **If groups are too large, they will be separated by proficiency level and grade level within the classroom. 2018-19 CEP 55  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information In addition, After School Teachers will discuss the progress of the students with classroom teachers. We will provide ELL students with experiences that expand on the themes and topics that are being developed in the classroom, Instruction focuses on students' growth and individual success as indicated in the state exams, periodic assessments and class work. Teachers will use scaffolding strategies in literacy and all content areas. Workshop model strategies will be utilized to support language. Sheltered English strategies will also be used in order to assure the acquisition of English. Instruction will be provided in English with support from the native language. The classroom environment is print-rich with picture support, which includes word walls, leveled classroom libraries, listening center and strategy charts. In order to assure that these programs support the instruction in the classroom; articulation between the ENL instructors and the classroom teachers will be an essential component for these programs. Teachers involved in this program will also be part of the professional development provided to classroom teachers. Student assessments will be ongoing. Such assessments include observations, criterion assessments, performance tasks, oral language samples, student writing samples, oral proficiency interviews, story retelling, and unit assessments. Using a variety of program delivery models and providing a continuum of support services, classroom and after-school teachers have a shared responsibility to ensure all ELL's reach full educational equality with their native speaking English-speaking peers, and to provide a language-rich environment that promotes high expectations for academic achievement. Due to the scope and priority of this program, a licensed supervisor will be needed in order to ensure the implementation of high quality differentiated instruction. The supervisor will provide support to participating staff and students, monitor student and teacher attendance, ensure the quality of instruction and the safety and security of the students and staff. Materials: In order to provide a quality supplemental instructional program, the following materials will be utilized in the Title III program: **Professional Literature: "Help! My Kids Don't Speak English" This book provides teachers with strategies in order to modify the curriculum to address the ELL student's needs. **Student Materials: "Getting Ready for the NYSESLAT" (Attanasio & Associated) The new updated version includes picture and sentence comprehension, dialogue & academic Content, picture Identification with simple questions, short passages for comprehension, writing sentences for grades K-2, writing descriptive paragraphs for grades 3-5, and writing fact-based essays for grades 3-5. These materials are supplemental and different from those used for daily instructions. **General Supplies for students (chart paper, notebooks, pens, pencils, etc.) The listed materials above are supplemental and only used during the after-school program. Attendance is taken during each session twice. Once while students get their snack in the cafeteria and when they are in their assigned classroom. The attendance is submitted to the supervisor on a weekly basis and kept in an attendance binder. All parent letters are translated in the home language. 2018-19 CEP 56  Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: All PS 120 teachers receive ongoing professional development in language acquisition that reflects the needs of our students. We will focus on scaffolding instruction and differentiating lessons based on student data. The teachers instructing the ENL After-school program include ENL teachers and highly-qualified Common Branch/Content-Area teachers. The primary focus of the program will be the development of English literacy skills and increasing academic language. The teachers will attend professional development provided by the borough field support (Brooklyn North) our Network, New York University and by Southern Cross consultancy. The professional development attended is based on the calendars and availability provided by listed above. The ENL teachers have attended the following Professional Development at no cost to Title III: *Sexual Harassment Prevention September 17, 2018 #180917-571833-30-170840 *ELL Point and Working Group September 17, 2018 Michael Lee *Interactive Gatekeeper Course, October 2, 2018 Kognito Support *Understanding the NYS Next Generation ELA Standards and Applying them in the K-5 Classroom . October 12, 2018 NYC RBERN *Cultivating Knowledge, Building Language in the Classroom, October 17, 2018 ELL Working Group *Organizing Lessons, Providing Consistency, December 5, 2018 M. Lee *Developing Academic Content Knowledge by Studying Big Ideas, January 16, 2019 ELL Working Group *****Future Professional Development will be registered for pending on availability. **** The workshops attended by the Title III teachers will be turn-keyed to staff members during Monday faculty conference and grade level conferences. The professional development has centered around lesson plan writing for ENL students, building vocabulary, scaffolding lessons and differentiated instruction, literacy skills, NYSESLAT in alignment to Common Core Learning Standards and the 5 NYSESLAT Performance Levels. ENL teachers have turn-keyed the following information through professional development. Teachers will use sheltered English strategies in order to assure the acquisition of English. In order to assure that these programs support the instruction in the classroom, articulation between after-school teachers and classroom teachers will be an essential component for this program. * Lesson Plan writing for ENL Students, October 1, 2018 9-10am *Building Vocabulary, October 22, 2018 2:30-4pm *Blueprint for English Language Learner/Multilingual Learner Success, November 19, 2018 2:30 – 4:00 *Scaffolding Lessons, Organization Providing Consistency, December 3, 2018 9-10am 2018-19 CEP 57  Part C: Professional Development The following is a list of upcoming Professional Development that will be given by ENL teachers to the staff. *Differentiated Instruction, January 18, 2019 9-10am *NYSESLAT in Alignment to Common Core Learning Standards, March 4, 2019 2:30-4pm *5 NYSESLAT Performance Levels, April 8, 2019 2:30-4pm All teachers involved in teaching the ENL after-school program will participate in planning sessions that focus on literacy, differentiated instruction, and ENL teaching and learning strategies. In addition, teachers will examine student work and discuss student progress. Teachers teaching the ENL after-school are scheduled to plan every Thursday during their common prep (12/13, 12/20, 1/3, 1/10, 1/17, 1/24, 1/31, 2/7, 2/14, 2/21, 2/28, 3/7, 3/14, 3/21, 3/28, 4/4, 4/11, 5/2, 5/9, 5/16) from 12:45- 1:35 pm Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: PS 120 recognizes that parents are children's first teachers. Research shows that students who have involved parents perform better and achieve more academically. The parents of English Language Learners play an important role in their child's program and should be involved in all phases of the ENL program. We work closely with community-based organizations to provide our parents with education classes, health programs and other services. We currently offer and host a variety of workshops. PS 120 offers workshops and materials to help parents work with their children improve academic achievement through Literacy skill workshops, Math problem-solving workshops, Science and Social Studies content based workshops, homework help workshops and parent right workshops. For example, The school also provides parent involvement workshops such as Health and Nutrition workshops through Cornell University and CookShop. The Parent Coordinator and Pre-K Family worker will conduct Mommy and Me, Book Club, CookShop and The Leader in Me Workshops. Mommy and Me and Book Club are literacy centered workshops that focus on literacy skills and strategies. These workshops are conducted every Friday beginning in October through May from 8:30- 9:30am. Cookshop Workshops will meet every Wednesday from 9-10am from January through April. An art residency through artist Ana Soto will be provided through a series of 10 2hr. sessions. They workshops will meet 12/2, 12/9. 12/16, 12/23, 1/13, 1/20, 1/272/3, 2/10 and 2/17. Workshops are also provided in The Leader in Me process. The 7 habits are focused through monthly workshops. The following are the dates of the Leader in Me parent workshops, 10/4, 11/18, 12/15, 1/19, 2/16, 3/17, 4/7 from 9-10am. There is always a translator (Spanish speaking) available during all parent workshops and if needed the translation/interpretation may be used . Title III funds will be used to purchase dual-language books and materials. The parents will be provided with the dual-language books and 2018-19 CEP 58 Part D: Parental Engagement Activities materials so that they may be utilized at home to support their children. Workshops are communicated through translated letters, announced during PTA meetings and listed on the school website. All workshops have an agenda and sign-in sheet. The Parent Coordinator will keep all agendas and sign-in sheets and kept in a binder as reference. Parent needs are assessed through surveys (given at the beginning and middle of the school year), Parent-Teacher Conferences, Parent-Teacher Association meetings, workshops and meetings . The staff listens closely to parent needs and concerns. Through conversations and survey findings workshop topics are provided to parents throughout the school year. Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits) n/a  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a 2018-19 CEP 59  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 14 School Name Public School 120 Borough Brooklyn School Number 120 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal L. Caraballo-Suarez Coach D. Duck ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher M. Caiafa Teacher/Subject Area B. Calcano Teacher/Subject Area N/A Related-Service Provider K. Robinson Superintendent A. Winnicki Assistant Principal J. Aiken Coach D. Duck School Counselor Ms. Baginska Parent E Navarrez Parent Coordinator K. Ramos Field Support Center Staff Member M. Lee Other (Name and Title) NA C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 0 2 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 400 2018-19 CEP 60 Total number of ELLs 60 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 15.00%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 1 2 K 0 0 0 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 0 4 0 0 0 3 0 0 0 5 0 0 0 6 0 0 0 7 0 0 0 8 0 0 0 9 0 0 0 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? Our school uses Fountas and Pinnell Running Records, Fundations, and Writing-on-Demand tasks to assess the early literacy development of our ELL students. These tools are effective for providing focus and direction when formulating curriculum and modifying classroom instruction. For example, we compare NYSESLAT reading and writing scores with the students' performance on the New York State ELA reading and writing in order to target instruction based on the students' needs. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? Fountas and Pinnell Running Records are administered three times per year. Writing on demand is given twice per year, at the beginning and end of the school year, and occasionally after the completion of a unit. Fundations is used throughout the year to support letter and sound recognition. 2018-19 CEP 61  3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? We monitor student progress through the analysis of student performance on the Rigby ELL Assessment tool, performance over time on the NYSESLAT, and periodic assessments in addition to academic progress and teacher-created assessments for ENL students specifically. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? Leadership discusses the progress of ELL students and specific strategies for teaching English Language Learners during weekly one-on-one teacher meetings. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] Using the results of periodic assessments, our school utilizes a 3-tier instructional system to adapt to the needs of the students as outlined by the RTI framework: Tier 1 is the instructional core that is intended to incorporate high quality evidence-based instruction for all students. This includes instruction that has been shown to be effective for English Language Learners, and differentiation to meet students’ diverse needs. Instruction for ELLs in English language development is provided at the Tier 1 instructional level. Students move into Tier 2 and Tier 3 if they demonstrate a need for more targeted and intensive academic support. This extra support can occur in the classroom, but also in separate settings with instruction focused on specific learning targets. Tier 2 and Tier 3 instruction should also be tailored to meet the students' language needs and should be incorporated into research-based intervention strategies. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. A review of the Fall 2017 administration of the NYSITELL indicates the following: In kindergarten, 25% (2 out of 8 ELLs) are on the entering level, 63% (5 out of 8 ELLs are on the emerging level, and 13% (1 out of 18 ELLs) is on the expanding level. This data indicates that the majority of the kindergarten ELLs are either on the entering or transitioning levels. A review of the Fall 2015 administration of the NYSESLAT indicates the following: In the first grade, 10% (1 out of 10 ELLs) was on the entering level, 20% (2 out of 10 ELLs) are on the emerging level, 20% (2 out of 10 ELLs) are on the transitioning level, and 50% (5 out of 10 students) are on the expanding level. In the second grade, 50% (6 out of 12 ELLs) are on the transitioning level and 50% (6 out of 12 ELLs) are on the expanding level. In the third grade, 40% (2 out of 5 ELLs) are on the transitioning level and 60% (3 out of 5 ELLs) are on the expanding level. In the fourth grade, 14% (1 out of 7 ELLs) is on the entering level, 43% (3 out of 7 ELLs) are on the emerging level, 14% (1 out of 7 ELLs) is on the transitioning level, and 29% (2 out of 7 ELLs) are on the expanding level. In the fifth grade, 17% (1 out of 6 ELLs) is on the emerging level and 83% (5 out of 6 ELLs) are on the expanding level. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? Based on test data, the school has 50% of its ELLs identified as on the expanding level. As a result, the school is implementing several literacy initiatives. This includes literacy across content areas - reinforcing writing and vocabulary skills, text annotation, and supports that are specific to beginners (self-contained ENL). Part IV: ELL Programming 2018-19 CEP 62  Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. ELLs receive instruction in a stand-alone ENL class, delivered by a certified ENL teacher. Our school uses a push-in/pull-out program. Students are grouped by grade level and proficiency level. If the groups are too large, they will be separated by proficiency level and grade level within the classroom. In the pull-out program, students receive ENL instruction for 45 minutes per day to specifically work on their English development skills in a separate ENL classroom. In the push-in program, the ENL teacher joins a classroom with an ELL student population and provides support in all content areas. All instruction is given entirely in English. Bilingual scaffolds are provided to the students who may need further support. b. TBE program. If applicable. N/A c. DL program. If applicable. N/A 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? All instruction is given via the freestanding ENL program. The time given to the ELLs for instruction in both pull-out and push-in programs is allocated according to the students' proficiency level. The school ensures that the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided by maintaining logs and records of the students' participation in these programs. - For students at the Entering and Emerging levels, each student receives 360 minutes of ENL instruction time per week. - For students at the Transitioning and Expanding levels, each student receives 180 minutes of ENL instruction time per week. - For students at the Commanding level and former ELLs, each student will receive additional services for two years 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. Instruction in the content areas is delivered in English using SDAIE (Specially Designed Academic Instruction in English) and SIOP (Sheltered Instruction Observation Protocol) strategies such as Content and Language Objectives, using UDL (Universal Design for Learning) to scaffold lessons, and infusing PBL (Project Based Learning) units to help increase academic and content vocabulary. Content teachers work with the ENL teacher to ensure students are developing their academic language while meeting the demand of the Common Core Learning Standards. The content and ENL teacher also use summary and sentence frames, graphic organizers, and ENL glossaries from NYSED for content areas. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? All Spanish-speaking new entrants who score at or below the cut scores on the NYSITELL will be administered a Spanish LAB by the ENL teachers. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status 2018-19 CEP 63  a. Instructional Plan for SIFE: There are basic instructional strategies shared between the instructional program for SIFE and newcomers. Both categories of students are in pre-production or early production stages. The major difference is that SIFE students lack fundamental literacy in their native language. Sheltered Instruction techniques are utilized. ENL teachers ensure that literature and content materials are appropriate and adapted to students’ ability levels. Remedial materials may be utilized so that the ELL student can catch up to grade level. Teachers adjust their rate of speech to enhance comprehension. English study is intensive and incorporates both social and academic language. Scaffolding strategies that increase comprehension include visuals, graphic organizers, manipulative, and teacher modeling. Other scaffolding strategies include pre-teaching vocabulary, frequent comprehension checks and increased wait time. There are computer activities, hands-on activities, and collaborative learning activities such as task oriented projects and small group activities. Teachers also promote a “buddy system” in the classroom, family involvement at home, and overall, an appreciation for cultural diversity. b. Instructional Plan for Newcomers: There are basic instructional strategies shared between the instructional program for SIFE and newcomers. Both categories of students are in pre-production or early production stages. The major difference is that SIFE students lack fundamental literacy in their native language. Sheltered Instruction techniques are utilized. ENL teachers ensure that literature and content materials are appropriate and adapted to students’ ability levels. Remedial materials may be utilized so that the English Language Learner can catch up to grade level. Teachers adjust their rate of speech to enhance comprehension. English study is intensive and incorporates both social and academic language. Scaffolding strategies that increase comprehension include visuals, graphic organizers, manipulative, and teacher modeling. Other scaffolding strategies include pre-teaching vocabulary, frequent comprehension checks and increased wait time. There are computer activities, hands-on activities, and collaborative learning activities such as task oriented projects and small group activities. Teachers also promote a “buddy system” in the classroom, family involvement at home, and overall, an appreciation for cultural diversity. Additional strategies used with newcomers include listing and reviewing instructions step by step and focusing on the language functions: describing, retelling, comparing, contrasting, and summarizing. c. Instructional Plan for developing ELLs: For developing ELLs (students received four to six years of ENL instruction), sheltered instruction techniques are utilized. ENL teachers ensure that literature and content materials are appropriate and adapted to students' ability levels. Remedial materials may be utilized so that the ELL student can catch up to grade level. Teachers adjust their rate of speech to enhance comprehension. English study is intensive and incorporates both social and academic language. Scaffolding strategies that increase comprehension include visuals, graphic organizers, realia, manipulative, and teacher modeling. Other scaffolding strategies include pre-teaching vocabulary, frequent comprehension checks and increased wait time. There are computer activities, hands-on activities, and collaborative learning activities such as task-oriented projects and small group activities. Teachers also promote a "buddy system" in the classroom, family involvement at home, and overall, an appreciation for cultural diversity. Additional strategies used with newcomers include listing and reviewing instructions step by step and focusing on the language functions: describing, retelling, comparing, contrasting, and summarizing. d. Instructional Plan for Long-Term ELLs: In general, long-term ELLs have bridged the academic language stage and demonstrate advanced skills in social/academic language with native-like fluency. They have an increased vocabulary development and demonstrate higher levels of comprehension. Therefore, the instructional plan for long-term ELLs includes all instructional strategies utilized with lower proficiency ELLs, but is highlighted with learning note-taking skills and test taking skills. Academic language continues to be developed. Literary devices such as figurative language and idioms are studied further. e. Instructional Plan for former ELLs for up to two years after exiting ELL status: For at least two years following the school year in which a student is exited from ELL status, former ELLs receive at least one half of one unit of study of English as a new language (90 minutes per week) and are eligible for certain specified testing accommodations. These accommodations include time extensions for all exams, separate location for exam administration, a third reading of listening sections (ELA), bilingual dictionaries and glossaries. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? ELL-SWDs are provided with material that contains visuals and dramatized readings. To build academic vocabulary and simplify content and concept knowledge, Total Physical Response methods are used. The technology that is used to help these 2018-19 CEP 64  students includes Smart Boards, CD players and computers. The ENL teacher meets with the School Based Support Team and the assistant principal and/or the principal to ensure that ELL-SWDs receive the proper ELL services. In some cases, a bilingual assistant helps the student in class during the day. The ELL- SWDs use the same materials and do the same work as the mainstream students; however, the tasks and assignments are differentiated based on the student's abilities and on the IEP goals. Some students may need simplified instruction using only one or two words, while others may need simpler language or have the task broken down into smaller components. Furthermore, multiple intelligence problem solving strategies are also used by teachers to promote academic success. These strategies include linguistic, logical-mathematical, bodily-kinesthetic, musical, interpersonal and naturalistic approaches. Curricular, Instructional, and scheduling: The school has been implementing strategies from the books The Title I Teaching Guide to Teaching Reading, and Help! My Kids Don’t All Speak English. In addition to this, teachers also received Professional Development on how to confer with children by Carl Anderson. This Professional Development has enabled teachers to modify their writing workshop to meet the needs of our English Language Learner/SWDs. Students are provided with extra support through the teaching of reading and writing through the content areas. • Assign tasks at an appropriate reading level. • Provide an overview of the lesson before beginning. • Pre-teach difficult vocabulary. • Use concrete examples of concepts before teaching the abstract (for example, use math manipulative). • Relate information to the student's experiential base. • Model strategies and give examples. • Give instructions in more than one modality • Relate lessons to the "real world." • Monitor the student's comprehension of language used during instruction. • Schedule frequent, short conferences with the student to check for comprehension. • Provide consistent review of any lesson before introducing new information. Give written directions to supplement verbal directions. • Utilize visual aids. • Utilize manipulative, hands-on activities. • Provide an established daily routine. • Provide clear rules and consistently enforce them Work with student in an area free of distractions. • Provide opportunities for movement. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? Our school uses curricular, instructional, and schedule flexibility to enable all ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment through after-school programs, small group instruction, trips, special events such as Leadership, Multicultural and Field Day, lunch time, and recess. The ELL-SWDs are in the same classes with the mainstream students in after-school programs and in small group instruction. P.S. 120 ensures that flexible programming is used to maximize time spent with non-disabled peers through meetings between the general education teachers, special education teachers, the out of classroom teachers, SETSS teacher and School Based Support Team as well as the administration. At lunch time, the ELL-SWDs eat at the same tables and at the same time as the non-disabled students. They also play together at recess. By encouraging mainstream children to interact with ELL-SWDs, we are able to help these children achieve their IEP goals. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. 2018-19 CEP 65  All teachers know who their ENL students are and review the progress of their students during weekly Accountable Community and weekly one-on-one meetings. Based on student progress/data, in addition to data from periodic assessments, teachers have determined that the failure rates are higher with ELL students. The teachers have identified that they need to differentiate based on language needs are integrating SDAIE and SIOP strategies. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? New Programs or Improvements: New student materials aligned to the New York State Common Core standards will be used to support students' language acquisition, as well as increase ability to meet the standards. The school will begin to implement school-wide programs such as Project Based Learning and STEAM projects that focus on architecture, engineering, and design to help enhance all students' learning across all domain. The following new partnerships will support the school's magnet program of architecture, engineering and design: -Buck Institute (Project- Based Learning) -Southern Cross -Kinderdance -Brooklyn Botanic Garden -Engineering is Elementary - BEAM - City at Work - Cookshop -The Leader In Me -ALJA 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? Currently, there are no programs or services that will be discontinued. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. All students are welcome to join in any activities that the school provides. The classroom teachers, ENL teachers, Administration and Parent Coordinator send translated letters home telling parents about the programs and calling parents to encourage them to send their children to these programs. Notices in Spanish about these programs are also sent to the parents. There are specific programs tailored to the needs of the ELL population. The school offers an after-school program for grades 1 to 5. The RTI program is also available for those students who need academic support services. There are also after school activities that are available to ELLs, such as a music program, an English Language Arts program, a math program, and a science program. The goals of these programs are to help the student in literacy, math and content area subjects through the use of supplemental activities and materials designed to improve the student's knowledge base and improve strategies to decode words, solve mathematical problems as well as improve comprehension in reading and academic language. Other services include programs with the guidance counselor and parent coordinator and special performances in the auditorium. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. Teachers are using a variety of instructional materials to support English Language Learners including bilingual glossaries from NYSED for content areas, bilingual dictionaries, teacher-created materials, Smart Boards, Smart Tables, laptops and other technology in all content areas, and translation software. ELL learners have access to programs like Raz- Kids. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? To provide home language support for ELLs, bilingual dictionaries and bilingual books are available in students’ home languages such as Spanish, Chinese, and Arabic. ELLs are provided with translated glossaries on state exams. Translators are also made available for native languages without translated materials. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. All required services support and resources correspond to ELL’s ages and grade levels. A variety of comprehensive ENL programs are used in ENL instruction including Award Reading Program K-2nd grade (Students’ develop reading skills in the five key areas recognized for success in learning to read: phonemic awareness, vocabulary, fluency,and 2018-19 CEP 66  comprehension.) Treasure Chest Program for 3rd-5th grade (Provides differentiated instruction to address all language-acquisition levels: Beginning, intermediate, and advanced. It also provides oral language, vocabulary and vocabulary strategies, phonics, Language Structure, Comprehension Strategies and skills.) Rigby On Our Way to English K-5th grade (The program provides English oral language development, comprehensive literacy instruction, and standard-based content area information.) Test preparation materials are also utilized including Getting Ready For the NYSESLAT and Finish Line New York ELLs K-5th grade. . 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? Teachers are using a variety of instructional materials to support English Language Learners including bilingual glossaries from NYSED for content areas, bilingual dictionaries, teacher-created materials, SmartBoards and other technology in all content areas, and translation software. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). In order to provide ELL's with support for the upcoming school year, selected students are offered to attend the ENL summer program. An orientation is provided at the beginning of each school year, for ENL families. In addition, the school provides parent workshops throughout the school year. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? N/A 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? N/A Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? Staff members have attended various professional development workshops and conferences. ENL Teachers have attended the Borough Office ENL study group. They have also completed Quality Teaching for English Learners (QTEL) Level 1 with WestEd and Teaching Academic Writing to ELLs offered by the Office of English Language Learners. ENL Teachers have attended technical assistance meetings regarding the Bilingual Education Student Information Survey (BESIS) and NYSESLAT. Teachers are given the opportunity to make inter-visitations to observe ENL programs in other schools. Teachers have the opportunity to turn-key information gathered at professional development workshops to the administration, other common branch teachers, subject area teachers, paraprofessionals, guidance counselors, and other staff members during staff development and faculty conferences. Language Allocation Policy (LAP) clinic - October 8, New York Star - November 9, Middle School Articulation - October 23, Inter-visitation - November to February 2018-19 CEP 67  ESL turnkey Faculty Conference - October 5, NYSESLAT/State Assessment for ELL Students - March 7, Integrating Technology to enhance ESL instruction - December 14, Tips for Helping ELLs with the CCLS - April 25, Professional development offered: - Conferring with Carl Anderson - Engineering is Elementary - Buck Institute - City at Work - Southern Cross - New York Star - Middle School Articulation - Inter-visitation - ENL Turnkey Faculty Conference - NYSESLAT/State Assessments for ELL Students - Integrating Technology to Enhance ENL Instruction The professional development that is offered to teachers of ELLs in supporting ELLs as they engage in CCLS includes providing insights and strategies to help students answer questions, comprehend information taught as well as ways to provide help to those who have difficulties learning concepts. These professional development workshops include how to teach children to answer different kinds of questions,what information is needed to answer certain questions, simplifying language and text and vocabulary development. These activities help teachers provide support to ELL students in class because the teacher has strategies to help students master the material which is taught. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. ENL teachers and mainstream teachers collaborate during common planning times in order to discuss the needs of ELL students and instructional strategies and solutions. ENL teachers are sent to workshops provided by the District and The New York State Language Regional Bilingual Education Network at Steinhardt NYU. Time is scheduled during Monday afternoon professional development for the ENL teachers to turn-key. Agendas, sign-in sheets, and handouts are filed in the professional development binder, located in the main office. Signing sheets and agendas are kept in the Professional Development binders which is kept in the Office. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? Our school individually meets with the parents or guardians of English language learners at least once a year, in addition to parent-teacher conferences, initial parent orientations, quarterly progress meetings or other scheduled meetings provided for parents or guardians, to discuss the goals of the program, their child’s language development progress and needs, and their child’s English language proficiency assessment results in all content areas. This additional meeting also includes school staff necessary to sufficiently inform the parents or guardians about the child’s language development in all content areas, in English and in the child’s home language, in the case of students enrolled in a bilingual education program. Such a meeting is conducted with a qualified interpreter/translator in the language or mode of communication the parent or guardian best understands. Our school determines the manner and form of such individual parent meetings, in accordance with collective bargaining agreements. 2018-19 CEP 68  2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Parents are involved in various workshops/ teams throughout the year: - ENL Parent Orientation - PTA meetings - School Leadership Team: Parents on the School Leadership Team attended workshops, the NYSESPA Conference, CSA Conferences, and UFT Conferences - Parent Lighthouse Team - Project Art with Ana Soto - Workshop on phonics program (K-5) - Workshop on preparing for state exams - Information Session on Homework Helper - Information Session on Cool Culture - Dial-A-Teacher Conference - Planned parenthood (various topics) - Woodhull Hospital Outreach Program on Asthma and Diabetes - Cook Shop: a hands-on workshop which empowers families to make healthy dietary choices - Curriculum Day/Night -- Presentation on School Data and the Progress Report - Parents volunteer as translators during Parent-Teacher Conferences - Book Club - Mommy and Me - Learning leader Training The Parent Coordinator sends home a survey that asks parents to specify the workshops and programs in which they may be interested in participating. The DOE provides translation services so that all surveys can be translated in the native language of the parents. The Parent Coordinator shares the survey data with administration and teachers. As a team, workshops are designed to support parents. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. N/A 2018-19 CEP 69 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Liza Caraballo-Suarez, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 CEP 70  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: Magnet School of Architecture, School DBN: 14K120 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) L. Caraballo-Suarez Title Principal J.Aiken K.Ramos M. Caiafa E. Navarrez B. Calcano na D. Duck na E. Baginska A. Winnicki M Lee Assistant Principal Parent Coordinator ENL/Bilingual Teacher Parent Teacher/Subject Area Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach School Counselor Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member M Lee K. Robinson Other related Services NA NA Other NA Other NA Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 10/18/18 10/18/18 10/18/18 10/18/18 10/18/18 10/18/18 na 10/18/18 na 10/18/18 NA 10/18/18 10/18/18 na na 2018-19 CEP 71  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 14k120 School Name: PS120 Superintendent: A. Winnicki The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No (*Primary) * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. When students are enrolled, parents are interviewed and the HLIS form is completed. The large number of students requiring ENL services after taking the Language Assessment Battery/Identification Test for English Language Learners indicates that many parents do not speak English. Preferred languages are reviewed using ATS reports and parent surveys. Since the population of the school is 87% Hispanic, we understand that we must provide language translation and interpretation services in Spanish for our parents. In recent years, there has been an increase in Asian speaking families. Translations are provided by staff members. The school also utilizes the New York City DOE Office of Translation Services. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. 2018-19 CEP 72 Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Language All findings of our needs assessments are discussed at leadership team meetings, grade conferences, faculty conferences and PTA meetings. The New York City Parent Surveys are reviewed in preparation of the Comprehensive Education Plan. The entire school community is aware that translation services have been on-going and will continue to be part of our parent involvement policy. Currently, most parents prefer written and oral communications in English or Spanish. 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. All correspondence are translated for the school community. Some of the correspondence include newsletters, calendars, school event invitations, after-school and field trip permission forms. 2018-19 CEP 73  2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide interpretation service(s)? Translators are provided for Parent-Teacher Conferences, Curriculum Evening, Orientations, Parent Workshops, and other parent meetings. Our administration, parent coordinator, SBST, attendance outreach, family workers, many paraprofessionals and teachers speak both English and Spanish. A staff member is always available to translate on the telephone or at a parent conference. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) The school will notify parents at PTA meetings and school leadership meetings regarding translation and interpretation services. P.S. 120 will also send home written notification with students in the language preferred by parents. The school will also continue to post the availability of translation services. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services 2018-19 CEP 74  Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? The school gathers feedback from parents via parent surveys, PTA meetings, and School Leadership Team meetings. The parent coordinator conducts surveys twice a year in order to gather family needs and strengthen the home-school connection. PTA meetings are held monthly, and PTA members are available to the parents. The School Leadership Team meets twice a month. The PTA members share at these meetings, the concerns of the school community. 2018-19 CEP 75 
