2018-19 COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (CEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 21K121 School Name: P.S. 121 NELSON A. ROCKEFELLER Principal: ANTHONY MUNGIOLI 2018-19 CEP 1  Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 CEP 2  School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information PS/IS 121 Nelson A. Rockefeller 332100010121 K, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8 5301 20 Avenue, Brooklyn, NY 11215 School Number (DBN): 21K121 718 – 377 - 8845 Phone Number: 718 – 252 – 4075 Fax: Anthony Mungioli amungio@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Geographical District: 21 Superintendent’s Office Address: Email Address: Anthony Mungioli Lucille Randazzo Nataliya Petito Tara Grogan Josephine Colon N/A N/A N/A District Information Isabel DiMola Superintendent: 1401Emmons Avenue, Room 101, Brooklyn, NY 11235 idimola@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718 – 648 – 0209 Phone Number: 718 – 648 – 2165 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) 2018-19 CEP 3  Brooklyn South Mauricierede Govia FSC: Executive Director’s Office Address: Executive Director: 415 89 th Street, Brooklyn, NY 11209 MDegovi@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 718 – 759 – 4862 Phone Number: 718 – 759 - 4960 Fax: 2018-19 CEP 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Anthony Mungioli Lucille Randazzo YuchinLiu Maria Lopez Josephine Colon LeonardaHuertas Tara Grogan Mark Liu *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/ Teacher UFT Member/ Teacher UFT Member/ Parent 2018-19 CEP 5  Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Pamela Siddiqui EnikoToth Member/ Parent Member/Parent Member/Parent Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ 2018-19 CEP 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with 2018-19 CEP 7  the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement 2018-19 CEP 8  Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 1. What is your school’s mission statement? VISION STATEMENT Section 4: CEP Overview It is the vision of PS/IS 121 Nelson A. Rockefeller Magnet School of Applied Life Sciences to sustain a learning environment that brings experiences with the living environment directly to students in an urban setting, resulting in increased student knowledge and skills that can be applied to improving their lives, their community, and their world. They will develop self-efficacy, a genuine kindness towards the environment and humanity, and become a community 2018-19 CEP 9  of lifelong learners. Our students will be productive leaders of society. MISSION STATEMENT It is the mission of PS/IS 121 Nelson A. Rockefeller Magnet School of Applied Life Sciences to create and sustain a learning environment centered on a Life Sciences curriculum. We will expose students to various living environments in order to provide regular hands-on and minds-on experiential learning. In this learning environment, students will regularly access critical thinking processes by engaging in the scientific method in order to achieve high standards of academic excellence. Students will work collaboratively to solve problems and apply what they learn to improve their world. Together we make a difference! 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. PS/IS 121 Nelson A. Rockefeller is a school that spans 9 grades (Kindergarten through Grade 8) with a total enrollment of 338 for the 2018-2019 school year. Prior to 2014, the school was under capacity. Enrollment steadily increased between 2011 and 2014. For the past five years the school has been at or above capacity. Student demographics are: Asian 17%; Black or African American 3%; Hispanic 40%; White 37%. Approximately 22% of students are English Language Learners. Approximately 28% of students have special needs. The school houses an ASD Nest Program that provides inclusive learning for students with Autism. There is one ASD Nest Class on each grade from Kindergarten - Grade 5. Staff that service ASD Nest Classes receive ongoing specialized training to meet the needs of students with Autism and support students throughout the school day in various ways. This training is turn-keyed to the entire staff to build capacity in meeting the social–emotional needs of all students and ensure access to rigorous learning opportunities in an inclusive setting. A dedicated collaborative staff has worked diligently over the past six years to sustain high expectations as both the school’s population and staff grew, and instructional expectations shifted with the implementation of the CCLS. At the center of this growth and change has been the Lead Instructional Team. This team, along with strategic collaborations with other district and Field Support Center Instructional Leaders, has developed a yearly comprehensive School-Wide Instructional Focus that incorporates multiple initiatives (i.e. APPR and CCLS Shifts) in order to develop and implement a cohesive plan that addresses instruction, environment, professional learning, and family engagement. The team formalizes and documents learning that has been conducted over the past 6 years using a series of "theories of action" in a Professional Learning Handbook to sustain and build upon learning in a systematic manner, so that instructional foci from previous years perpetuate. In the fall of 2016, PS/IS 121 was awarded federal magnet status. The school vision and mission statement have been updated accordingly and all staff are working towards implementation and integration of the magnet theme into curriculum, instruction, and learning opportunities. The main vehicle of this work is the development of Project Based Learning (PBL) units. Each grade is developing three units of study with essential questions and embedded critical thinking tasks. As a magnet school, PS/IS 121 is partnering with various cultural and learning institutions to broadening authentic hands-on and minds-on learning experiences, and improve curriculum and pedagogy. PS/IS 121 partners with NIA Community Services Network as a part of the Schools Out New York City (SONYC) initiative to provide 15 hours a week of extended day opportunities for Grades 6 –8 and has expanded these extended day opportunities to students in Grade K – 5 as well. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. 2018-19 CEP 10  22% of the student population is comprised of English Language Learners. 28% of the population is comprised of students with special needs. 75% of the population is eligible for free lunch. In the 2018 – 2019 school year there will be 1 ASD Nest Class on each grade from Kindergarten through Grade 5. It is with these demographics in mind that the school community seeks to holistically meet the needs of all students, address student needs on an individualized basis, and make the classroom a therapeutic environment that supports social-emotional needs, using positive behavior interventions, so that rigorous academics are not compromised, and are met in an inclusive environment. As a result of this approach, the staff members seek to learn from each other and incorporate strategies that best meet the needs of each individual student, knowing that the classroom is the ideal place for all of a child’s needs to be met. In addition, components of PBL such as choice, authenticity, and public facing products, are providing students with access to curriculum with embedded critical thinking tasks in new and innovative ways. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. PS/IS 121 Nelson A. Rockefeller has made progress in all six elements of the Framework for Great Schools. The two elements in which PS/IS 121 Nelson A. Rockefeller made the most progress are Collaborative Teachers and Trust. A structured Professional Learning Community was established during the 2013 – 2014 school year, comprised of a significant fraction of the pedagogical staff. The Lead Instructional Team facilitates professional learning centered on collaboratively designed instructional initiatives. The team formalizes and documents learning that has been conducted over the past 6 years using a series of "theories of action" in a Professional Learning Handbook to sustain and build upon learning in a systematic manner. As roles of staff have evolved new members of the team have been invited to ensure all grades and constituencies are represented, and all teachers have a voice. Because of the diligent work of the team and collaborative open communication, trust continues to be a strength. The two key areas of focus for the 2018 – 2019 school year will continue to be be Rigorous Instruction and Supportive Environment. By further integrating the magnet theme into curriculum, instruction, and enrichment, PS/IS 121 will not only increase academic rigor, but provide expanded opportunities and access for diverse learners (including SWDs and ELLs) to engage in learning in an inclusive setting, thus enhancing the supportive environment. Students will be suppoted in access embedded critical thinking tasks through PBL curriculum. 2018-19 CEP 11  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 21K121 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration PK,0K,01,02,03,04,05,06,07,08 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 336 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 5 5 13 5 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 15 14 18 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 64.0% % Attendance Rate 62.5% % Reduced Lunch 19.0% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.6% 42.3% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 33.0% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 5.75 0% 19% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 58.9% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 87% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A YES YES YES YES Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A YES YES YES YES Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 72 72 94.3% 0.9% 27.1% 2.4% 20.2% 2.1% 2 6% 5.9 58.3% 21% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No N/A N/A N/A YES YES N/A YES N/A YES YES N/A N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 CEP 12  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. STRENGTH: Data below correlated with the most recent Quality Review Report are an indication that instructional changes, and subsequent incremental instructional growth and capacity building over the past five years, are resulting in more customized, inclusive, standards aligned, trans-disciplinary curriculum and instruction. Curricula aligning to the Common Core learning standards provides all students with opportunities to engage in rigorous instruction that builds the skills necessary to be college and career ready. In addition, components of PBL such as choice, authenticity, and public facing products, are providing students with access to curriculum with embedded critical thinking tasks in new and innovative ways. These instructional changes need to be continued and built upon to ensure that the overall percentage of students meeting or exceeding grade level standards in ELA and Mathematics continues to increase, and that growth translates into an increase in performance for all subgroups. NEEDS: Progress has been made and the school needs to continue to ensure that adequate rigor ensures continued growth for all students, including ELL and SWD subgroups. Therefore, a comprehensive approach to improve performance in Grades K - 8 is needed, with a focus on rigorous standards based PBL tasks that embed critical thinking tasks that support listening, speaking, reading, and writing performance based tasks so that both foundational skills and skills related to higher-order tasks are part of the educational approach. Steps towards creating a coherent set of curricula that provides students with engaging and rigorous learning opportunities in all grades and subject areas have been taken and need to continue. A focus on expanding opportunities for students to engage in tasks and activities that deepen critical thinking skills will support all learners. This will include exploring how the tasks within project based learning units can provide students with opportunities to participate in authentic learning that strengthens critical thinking skills. This needs to be coupled with a systematic approach to providing instruction related to foundational skills and tracking these skills in foundational grades (K - 2). The data to support this needs assessment are as follows: The percentage of students in grades 3 - 8 at level 3 and 4 on the New York State ELA exam has increased 32 points from 2013 - 2018. The increase from 2017 - 2018 was 16 points. In 2018 55% of students were at proficiency. There are still a significant portion of students not at proficiency. The data indicated that students in Grades 5 - 7 did not have equally significant gains. There has been a fluctuation of scores between 2014 - and 2018. These data indicate a 2018-19 CEP 13  need to focus on foundational grades to build well rounded skills that can be applied through Grade 8 resulting sustained gains as a goal of increasing rigor through improved curriculum and instruction is strived for.. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019 implementation of improved rigorous curriculum and instruction will lead to improved student achievement as evidenced by two-thirds of all students in Grades K - 2 meeting or exceeding school designated ‘growth target’ scores as measured by the New York City Performance Tasks for ELA. Growth Target Formula for New York Performance Tasks: Proficiency Rating+ ((4.5 – Proficiency Rating) x .2) The Growth Target Formula can be applied to periodic assessments allowing progress to be monitored throughout the year, making it an internal accountability measure for all students incorporated into the goal. By using this internal growth measurement, instead of New York State growth models, growth is measured against a student’s previous performance. It is not measured in comparison to peers. 2018-19 CEP 14  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional  programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Magnet School of Applied Life Sciences Project Based Learning (PBL) Curriculum Development: Administration, teachers, and paraprofessionals, students Teacher teams will engage in curriculum development based on professional learning centered on a research-based model for PBL. Professional learning was conducted by Buck Institute and turn-keyed at the school level to support development beginning February 2017 – July 2017. Continued support through Buck Institute through July 2018 is increasing teacher capacity to develop PBL units of study. Teacher teams will develop and write curriculum (essential questions, embedded critical thinking tasks, unit plans/lesson plans, and assessment components) in order to establish transdisciplinary learning opportunities connected to the magnet theme of applied life sciences as detailed in the grant proposal. Teacher teams and administration will procure materials and technology to establish learning environments that support PBL. Teacher teams will implement PBL units over the course of the year. Three PBL units per grade (Kindergarten through Grade 8) will be written and implemented during the 2018 -2019 school year. The goals of implementing PBL are to increase academic rigor, engage students in Weekly Instructional Team Meetings and Planning July 2018 through June 2019 Weekly professional learning on Mondays September 2018 through June 2019. All pedagogical staff, administration, and the Lead Instructional Team. The Team consists of coaches, mentors, and specialists from all grade levels and key content areas of the school. The Instructional Team meets weekly. Grade level teams meet for common planning and professional learning two times per week. 2018-19 CEP 15  authentic learning with a public facing product, provide students with voice and choice, and challenge them. An addition goal and benefit of PBL is to provide access to all students, including SWDs and ELLs. By proving multi-modal opportunities for students to engage with their peers in an inclusive learning environment with a diverse population of students, access will be increased. Professional Learning Inquiry – Looking At Student Work (LASW): Administration, teachers, and paraprofessionals 3 Cycles Sept. 2017 through June 2019 The Lead Instructional Team will continue to build capacity for inquiry and reflection by working with grade level teams in conducting inquiry centered on the CCLS, standards based curricula, the research based rubric for teacher evaluation (Danielson 2013), shared definitions of critical thinking, the components of PBL, and other instructional priorities. The Professional Learning Handbook serves as a reference guide to past and present priorities. An established “Looking At Student Work (LASW) Protocol” will be used to record inquiry results. Three cycles of LASW will be conducted from September through June. The Lead Instructional Team will track and share results of this inquiry at the end of each cycle. 3 Cycles from Sept. 2018 through June 2019 Professional Learning Community (PLC): Administration, teachers, paraprofessionals The Lead Instructional Team will meet weekly to coordinate all professional learning. Cycles of learning will be facilitated in three teacher groups with vertical representation across K -8, with a goal of distributing leadership within each group as the cycles progress. The team will also continue to focus on the instructional priorities and past instructional learning to increase capacity to teach ENL Students and SWDs in an inclusive setting, as well as UDL strategies All pedagogical staff, administration, and the Lead Instructional Team. The Team consists of coaches, mentors, and specialists from all grade levels and key content areas of the school. Grade level teams conduct inquiry during professional learning, common planning, and other professional work time allotted weekly. All pedagogical staff, administration, and the Lead Instructional Team. The Team consists of coaches, mentors, and specialists from all grade levels and key content 2018-19 CEP 16  for providing access to diverse populations of students. The Professional Learning Handbook serves as a reference guide to past and present priorities. As an added measure of distributive leadership, the Lead Team will begin generating and leading teacher teams to generate share notes for the "Weekly Professional Learning Notes." Magnet School of Applied Life Sciences Student Enrichment: Administration, teachers, paraprofessionals, and students Through the Magnet Program students will regularly engage in enrichment activities during and after regular school hours. This will be accomplished through contracted partnerships, regular student field trips, regular school day activities, and after school programs. Learning from the school day will be extended through student teams that meet after school. These teams will be guided through hands-on learning experiences by teacher leaders and school partner leaders with the goal of increasing engagement and challenging students. All enrichment activities are inclusive of SWDs and ELLs. This will also include family learning events, "Science Saturdays," where families can experience hands-on learning together. Progress Monitoring: I-Ready will be utilized as tool to monitor progress, generate data for teachers to use to inform pedagogy, provide teachers with lesson materials to supplement curriculum, and give families access to these tools outside of schools. This computer based diagnostic assessment will be used to streamline progress monitoring. In addition, the 'Growth Target Formula' will continued to be applied to periodic assessments allowing progress to be monitored throughout the year, making it an internal accountability measure for all students incorporated into the goal. By using this internal growth measurement, instead of New York State growth models, growth is measured against a student’s previous performance. It is not measured in comparison to peers. Administration, teachers, and paraprofessionals, families areas of the school. Monthly field trips October through May and Weekly After School Programs (Wednesday and Thursday for 1.5 hours) October through May Administration, Magnet Coordinator, Magnet Resource Specialist, Teachers Periodic Assessments are given in September, October, January, February, April, May and June All pedagogical staff, administration, and the Lead Instructional Team. The Team consists of coaches, mentors, and specialists from all grade levels and key content areas of the school. 2018-19 CEP 17 The formula can also be applied to measure progress of students in Grades K - 8 using curriculum created baselines and benchmarks. Coupled together teachers will be able to more closely monitor and address the needs of high-needs subgroups including SWDs and ELLs. District 21 Early Grades (K-2) Literacy Professional Learning: District 21 and Brooklyn South Field Support Center Learning Leaders are continuing with a third year of professional learning focused on Grade 2 and early grade literacy. Full day workshops are being provided for all schools in the district, building on Kindergarten and Grade 1 workshops from the previous two years. District 21 and Brooklyn South Field Support Center Learning Leaders, Administration, Instructional Coach, and Grade 2 Teachers District 21 K - 8 School Inter-visitations and Instructional Rounds: District 21 Administrators, District 21 Teachers, and Instructional Coaches. PS/IS 121 has conducted in-house instructional rounds, four times per year, for the past 4 years. A vast majority of staff participates in visiting colleagues classrooms and discussing positive improvements they can make based on their observations. This year, four K - 8 schools have partnered to expand this process beyond one single school and to proliferate the sharing and use of best practices in schools that span 9 grades. District Professional Learning is provided for the Literacy Coach and Grade 2 Teacher monthly. Four Inter-visitation opportunities will be hosted at four different K -8 schools in District 21 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Four Parent Teacher Conferences (September, November, December, and March) will be held to share instructional initiatives. Monthly family engagement events during school, after school, and on Saturdays will allow parents to participate in magnet themed and other learning opportunities alongside their children. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 2018-19 CEP 18  ● Contractual Professional Learning Time: 80 minutes weekly ● Contractual Family Engagement Time: 35 minutes weekly ● Contractual Professional Work Time: 40 minutes weekly ● Contractual Parent Teacher Conferences: 4 times per year ● Per Session Funding: Professional Learning Planning – Lead Instructional Team Summer/After School ● Per Diem Funding: substitute coverage for professional learning for pedagogues outside of the building ● Per Diem Funding: substitute coverage for common planning activities ● OTPS Funding: curriculum materials, supplemental materials, classroom supplies, furniture, technology, educational software OTPS Funding: transportation and admission fees for trips ● OTPS Funding: Curriculum and staff development partnerships (ASD Nest) ● Scheduling: common planning ● Scheduling: enrichment periods and advisory periods ● Scheduling: team meetings ● Field Support Center: Support Specialists ● District Support Personnel: Superintendent, Principal Leadership Facilitator, FSC Liaison, TDEC Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A X C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind X Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019 two-thirds of all students in Grades K – 2 will meet or exceed school designated mid-year benchmark ‘growth target’ scores as measured by New York City Performance Tasks for ELA. Mid-year benchmark ‘growth target' for Performance Tasks: Benchmark Proficiency Score + ((100 – Baseline Proficiency Score) x .1) The Growth Target Formula can be applied to periodic assessments allowing progress to be monitored throughout the year, making it an internal accountability measure for all students incorporated into the goal. By using this 2018-19 CEP 19  internal growth measurement, instead of New York State growth models, growth is measured against a student’s previous performance. It is not measured in comparison to peers. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) New York City Performance Task in ELA (October) and Benchmark (February) will be the specific instrument of measure used to assess progress. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 20  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? Strength: The ASD Nest program supports learning of high functioning students with Autism Spectrum Disorders through an integrated co-teaching model, in kindergarten through fifth grade. Strategies learned through ASD Nest professional learning and the ASD Nest model are being turn-keyed and employed throughout the school to support students by establishing a supportive classroom. Two full time guidance counselors support the social emotional needs of students across the school. Guidance counselors push-in to classes and work with students to build positive academic and personal behaviors, as well as working with students during non-academic times. A Student and Family Events Team works to provide incentives and other positive behavioral interventions and supports throughout the school, as well as organizing and facilitating family events that enhance the supportive environment. Needs: More work needs to be done to meet the needs of students in the middle range of proficiency ratings (2.50- 3.49) by making students and parents aware of the supports and interventions that are available, as well as incorporating students and parents into the processes and systems that can improve outcomes. Success in creating a supportive environment for all, (as has been done through the ASD Nest Model), is an important next step. More needs to be done to bridge needs for rigorous instruction and a supportive environment to meet the needs of students in this "middle range." Students in the "middle range may or may not have special needs. All students in this range need support regardless. A more well rounded instructional approach that incorporates multi-modal learning, hands-on activities, student interest, and authentic products is needed. The data to support this needs assessment are as follows: The percentage of students in grades 3 - 8 at level 3 and 4 on the New York State Math exam has increased 26 points from 2013 - 2018. The increase from 2017 - 2018 was 11 points. In 2018 58% of students were at proficiency. There are still a significant portion of students not at proficiency. The data indicated that students in Grades 5 - 7 did not have as significant of gains. From 2014 - 2018 there has been inconsistency and fluctuation in proficiency. There is a need to focus on Grades 3 -8 to build a supportive environment that sustains success in foundational years while academic demands become more rigorous, challenging, and complex for students that are in a range close to or just above proficiency, so that a continuum of success is created through all grades. 2018-19 CEP 21  The percentage of students in the middle range of proficiency (2.50 -3.49) in Mathematics for the past three years were: 2016 = 39% 2017 = 29.8% 2018 = 31% As we increase and sustain rigor, and further embed critical thinking and complex tasks, these students need a supportive environment that will help them see progress towards proficiency or the ability to sustain proficiency. As a school that has embraced holistic support approaches, such as the ASD Nest model, holistic approaches that incorporate Social Emotional Learning, extracurricular learning, and that include families in learning will be incorporated into the action plan. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019 strategies to improve classroom environment will lead improved student achievement as evidenced by two-thirds of all students in Grades 4 – 8 with a Proficiency Rating of 2.50 – 3.49 as measured by the 2018 New York State Mathematics Exam meeting or exceeding school designated ‘growth target’ scores as measured by The 2019 New York State Mathematics Exam. Growth Target Formula for New York State Exams: Proficiency Rating+ ((4.5 – Proficiency Rating) x .2) The Growth Target Formula can be applied to periodic assessments allowing progress to be monitored throughout the year, making it an internal accountability measure for all students incorporated into the goal. By using this internal growth measurement, instead of New York State growth models, growth is measured against a student’s previous performance. It is not measured in comparison to peers. The formula can also be applied to measure progress of students in Grades K -3 using curriculum created baselines and benchmarks. 2018-19 CEP 22  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs,  professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Student Support Structures: Collaborative planning time will be scheduled to support teachers in preparation for providing supports for students identified as at-risk based on data and teacher input. Using a case conferencing model, student support teams will meet weekly to identify students in need of additional support, select the best means of support, develop the support plan with those responsible and invested in the selected students’ successes, implement the support plan, and track student data/progress as the plan is carried out. One team, The ASD Nest Team will focus primarily on ASD students. Another Team, The Student Support Team (comprised of PPT, RTI, and AIS structures and personnel) will address all other students’ needs. Teams consist of administrators, teachers, speech teachers, occupational therapists, guidance counselors, psychologists, coaches, and other support staff. There will be cross membership for both teams to create coherence and share best practices/resources. Administration, teachers, paraprofessionals, students Students supported weekly beginning in Sept. 2018 through June 2019. Administrators, Teachers, and Paraprofessionals. The ASD Nest Team, The School Implementation Team (SIT). The SIT/PPT meets weekly. The ASD Team and SIT meet weekly. The ASD Nest team meets weekly. Members of these teams will analyze data and assign support providers using an RTI model. Student and Family Events/Engagement: All Staff, Families and Students A Student and Family Events Team will work to schedule, communicate and plan student and family events and formalize school-wide incentives for students that will both make the demands of a rigorous and challenging academic Events Team meets in the summer and weekly from September The Student and Family Events Team is comprised of Administrators, Teachers, Guidance Counselors, Parent 2018-19 CEP 23 2018 -June 2019 Coordinator, Programmer, and Pupil Accounting Secretary. Administration, teachers, paraprofessionals, and students Administration, Magnet Coordinator, Magnet Resource Specialist, Teachers Monthly field trips October through May and Weekly After School Programs October through May Administrators, Teachers, and Paraprofessionals. SIT meets weekly Sept. 2018 - June 2019 Administrators, Teachers, and Paraprofessionals. Implementation Team SIT meets weekly. environment feel safe and supportive. The team will develop incentives criteria for academic performance and progress and meeting social-emotional expectations; including incentives for attendance, report card grades, developing literacy and math skills, and complying with dress code mandates. Monthly family engagement events during school, after school, and on Saturdays will allow parents to participate in magnet themed and other learning opportunities alongside their children, resulting in a school environment where students feel supported and challenged. The Team will also plan and facilitate yearly family events such as The Cultural Unity Banquet and Thanksgivings Feast. The Team will meet regularly and coordinate calendars for events. Additional family engagement events will focus on literacy by providing time for parents to engage in reading activities with their children. Literacy events will be provided in additional languages to support families that speak languages other than English at home. Magnet School of Applied Life Sciences Student Enrichment: Through the Magnet Program students will regularly engage in enrichment activities during and after regular school hours. This will be accomplished through contracted partnerships, regular student field trips, regular school day activities, and after school programs. Learning from the school day will be extended through student teams that meet after school. These teams will be guided through hands-on learning experiences by teacher leaders and school partner leaders with the goal of increasing engagement and challenging students. All enrichment activities are inclusive of SWDs and ELLs. This will also include family learning events, "Science Saturdays," where families can experience hands-on learning together. School Implementation Team (SIT) Quality IEP Development: The SIT will focus on improving the quality of all components of the IEP to better represent the levels of performance and needs of students. The team will focus on improving the process of regular monitoring of IEP goals and sharing of progress with students and families. Teachers and related service providers will track student progress regularly by using various methods to determine if the IEP goal has been achieved. Staff will continue to collaborate with and engage parents in all aspects of IEP development and goal monitoring so that they are aware of their child’s progress towards their annual goals. This will provide each student with a quality IEP that is reflective of their abilities and the supports and services that will assist them is accessing the Common Core Learning Standards. 2018-19 CEP 24 Administrators, Teachers, and Paraprofessionals. SIT meets weekly Sept. 2018 - June 2019 Administrators, Teachers, and Paraprofessionals. Implementation Team SIT meets weekly. Social Emotional Learning (SEL): Guidance Counselors and administration will conduct monthly "Town Hall Meetings" with students focusing on SEL and Academic and Personal Behaviors. Grade K - 4 topics will center on the ASD Nest Social Development Intervention Curriculum to create a monthly focus. This will include connecting with others, processing the world around, reading and expressing emotions, interacting with peers, and making responsible choices. Grades 5 - 8 topics will center on NYC DOE Academic and Personal Behaviors. This will include persistence, engagement, work habits, communication, collaboration, and self regulation. Teachers will be provided with a synopsis of the SEL topics and activities concurrent with each "Town Hall Meeting" to support them with extending learning in the classroom. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Four Parent Teacher Conferences (September, November, December, and March) will be held to share instructional initiatives. Monthly family engagement events during school, after school, and on Saturdays will allow parents to participate in magnet themed and other learning opportunities alongside their children. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. ● Contractual Professional Learning Time: 80 minutes weekly ● Contractual Family Engagement Time: 35 minutes weekly ● Contractual Professional Work Time: 40 minutes weekly ● Contractual Parent Teacher Conferences: 4 times per year ● Per Session Funding: Professional Learning Planning –Lead Instructional Team After School ● Per Diem Funding: substitute coverage for professional learning for pedagogues outside of the building ● Per Diem Funding: substitute coverage for common planning activities ● OTPS Funding: curriculum materials, supplemental materials, classroom supplies, furniture, technology, educational software 2018-19 CEP 25  ● OTPS Funding: transportation and admission fees for trips ● OTPS Funding: Curriculum and staff development partnerships (ASD Nest) ● Scheduling: common planning ● Scheduling: enrichment periods and advisory periods ● Scheduling: team meetings ● Scheduling: AIS support ● Borough Field Support Center: Support Specialists ● District Support Personnel: Superintendent, Principal Leadership Facilitator, FSC Liaison, TDEC Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019 two-thirds of all students in Grades 4 – 8 with a Proficiency Rating of 2.50 – 3.49 as measured by the 2018 New York State Mathematics Exam will meet or exceed school designated mid-year benchmark ‘growth target’ scores as measured by Mock New York State Math Exams. Mid-year benchmark ‘growth target' for Mock New York State Exams: Benchmark Proficiency Score + ((100 – Baseline Proficiency Score) x .1) The Growth Target Formula can be applied to periodic assessments allowing progress to be monitored throughout the year, making it an internal accountability measure for all students incorporated into the goal. By using this internal growth measurement, instead of New York State growth models, growth is measured against a student’s previous performance. It is not measured in comparison to peers. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Mock New York State Math Benchmark (February) Exams will be the specific instrument of measure used to assess progress. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 26  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. STRENGTH: The Lead Instructional Team ensures cyclical and comprehensive professional learning weekly for the past five years for all pedagogues based upon teacher input, district level feedback, and analysis of student and teacher work. Professional Learning centered on deeper analysis of key standards, unpacking standards to create coherence across grades, analyzing student work to support standards analysis, analyzing key components of the research based teacher rubric (Danielson 2013), embedding critical thinking tasks, and developing PBL Units has resulted in collaborative growth and capacity building. NEED: Based on the work conducted in 2017-2018, teacher teams need to continue with deeper analysis of curriculum, embedded critical thinking tasks, and student work products. Teacher teams need to improve PBL Units to ensure that assessment criteria is clear and transparent and connects to embedded tasks in a transparently measurable way. The data to support this needs assessment are as follows: The percentage of students in grades 3 - 8 at level 3 and 4 on the New York State ELA exam has increased 32 points from 2013 - 2018. The increase from 2017 - 2018 was 16 points. 59% of students were at proficiency in 2018. There are still a significant portion of students not at proficiency. The data indicated that students in Grades 5 - 7 did not have as significant of gains. There has been a fluctuation of scores between 2014 - and 2018. The percentage of students with IEPs at proficiency has increased 40 points since 2013. The percentage of students with IEPs at proficiency increased 22 points from 2017 -2018. The gap between students with disabilities and general education students decreased by 8 percentage points from 2017 - 2018. For ELA Proficiency for students in in ICT/SETSS, the school's percentile rank within the district is 82. For ELA Proficiency for students in in ICT/SETSS, the school's percentile rank within the city is 79. Although these gains are significant and to be celebrated, much work needs to be done to continually ensure that the environment is conducive to supporting students with special needs. There is a need to focus on Grades 3 -8 teacher collaboration that sustains success in foundational years while academic demands become more rigorous, challenging, and complex for students that are in a range close to or just above proficiency, so that a continuum of success is created through all grades. Furthermore, there is a need for all staff to work collaboratively to ensure that the school provides access and entry points to all learners so that students with special needs can succeed with regards to the diverse and rigorous demands of a PBL curriculum. Part 2 – Annual Goal 2018-19 CEP 27  Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019 effective teacher collaboration strategies will lead to increased student achievement as evidenced by two-thirds of all students with IEPs in Grades 4 - 8 meeting or exceeding school designated ‘growth target’ scores as measured by The 2019 New York State ELA Exam. Growth Target Formula for New York City Exams: Proficiency Rating+ ((100 – Proficiency Rating) x .2) The Growth Target Formula can be applied to periodic assessments allowing progress to be monitored throughout the year, making it an internal accountability measure for all students incorporated into the goal. By using this internal growth measurement, instead of New York State growth models, growth is measured against a student’s previous performance. It is not measured in comparison to peers. The formula can also be applied to measure progress of students in Grades K -3 using curriculum created baselines and benchmarks. 2018-19 CEP 28  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs,  professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Magnet School of Applied Life Sciences Project Based Learning (PBL) Curriculum Development: Administration, teachers, and paraprofessionals Teacher teams will engage in curriculum development based on professional learning centered on a research-based model for PBL. Professional learning was conducted by Buck Institute and turn-keyed at the school level to support development beginning February 2017 – July 2017. Continued support through Buck Institute through July 2018 is increasing teacher capacity to develop PBL units of study. Teacher teams will develop and write curriculum (essential questions, embedded critical thinking tasks, unit plans/lesson plans, and assessment components) in order to establish transdisciplinary learning opportunities connected to the magnet theme of applied life sciences as detailed in the grant proposal. Teacher teams and administration will procure materials and technology to establish learning environments that support PBL. Teacher teams will implement PBL units over the course of the year. Three PBL units per grade (Kindergarten through Grade 8) will be written and implemented during the 2018 -2019 school year. The goals of implementing PBL are to increase academic rigor, engage students in authentic learning with a public facing product, provide students with voice and choice, and challenge them. An addition goal and benefit of PBL is to provide access to all students, including SWDs and ELLs. By proving multi-modal opportunities for students to engage with their peers in an inclusive learning environment with a diverse population of students, access will be increased. Weekly Instructional Team Meetings and Planning July 2018 through June 2019 Weekly professional learning September 2018 through June 2019. All pedagogical staff, administration, and the Lead Instructional Team. The Team consists of coaches, mentors, and specialists from all grade levels and key content areas of the school. The Instructional Team meets weekly. Grade level teams meet for common planning and professional learning two times per week. Professional Learning Inquiry – Looking At Student Work (LASW): Administration, teachers, and paraprofessionals Sept. 2018 through June 2019 The Lead Instructional Team will continue to build capacity for inquiry and reflection by working with grade level teams in conducting inquiry centered on the CCLS, standards based curricula, the research based rubric for teacher evaluation All pedagogical staff, administration, and the Lead Instructional Team. The Team consists of coaches, mentors, and 2018-19 CEP 29  (Danielson 2013), shared definitions of critical thinking, the components of PBL, and other instructional priorities. The Professional Learning Handbook serves as a reference guide to past and present priorities. An established “Looking At Student Work (LASW) Protocol” will be used to record inquiry results. Three cycles of LASW will be conducted from September through June. The Lead Instructional Team will track and share results of this inquiry at the end of each cycle. Administration, teachers, and paraprofessionals 3 Instructional Rounds from Sept. 2018 through June 2019 Administration, teachers, and paraprofessionals Sept. 2018 through June 2019 Professional Learning Community (PLC): The Lead Instructional Team will meet weekly to coordinate all professional learning. Cycles of learning will be facilitated in three teacher groups with vertical representation across K -8, with a goal of distributing leadership within each group as the cycles progress. The team will also continue to focus on the instructional priorities and past instructional learning to increase capacity to teach ENL Students and SWDs in an inclusive setting, as well as UDL strategies for providing access to diverse populations of students. The Professional Learning Handbook serves as a reference guide to past and present priorities. As an added measure of distributive leadership, the Lead Team will begin generating and leading teacher teams to generate share notes for the "Weekly Professional Learning Notes." Student Support Structures: Collaborative planning time will be scheduled to support teachers in preparation for providing supports for students identified as at-risk based on data and teacher input. Using a case conferencing model, student support teams will meet weekly to identify students in need of additional support, select the best means of support, develop the support plan with those responsible and invested in the selected students’ successes, implement the support plan, and track student data/progress as the plan is carried out. One team, The ASD Nest Team will focus primarily on ASD students. Another Team, The Student Support Team (comprised of PPT, RTI, and AIS structures and personnel) will address all other students’ needs. Teams consist of administrators, teachers, speech teachers, occupational therapists, guidance counselors, psychologists, coaches, and other support staff. specialists from all grade levels and key content areas of the school. Grade level teams conduct inquiry during professional learning, common planning, and other professional work time allotted weekly. All pedagogical staff, administration, and the Lead Instructional Team. The Team consists of coaches, mentors, and specialists from all grade levels and key content areas of the school. Administrators, Teachers, and Paraprofessionals. The ASD Nest Team, The School Implementation Team (SIT). The ASD Team and SIT meet weekly. 2018-19 CEP 30  There will be cross membership for both teams to create coherence and share best practices/resources. School Implementation Team (SIT) Quality IEP Development: The SIT will focus on improving the quality of all components of the IEP to better represent the levels of performance and needs of students. The team will focus on improving the process of regular monitoring of IEP goals and sharing of progress with students and families. Teachers and related service providers will track student progress regularly by using various methods to determine if the IEP goal has been achieved. Staff will continue to collaborate with and engage parents in all aspects of IEP development and goal monitoring so that they are aware of their child’s progress towards their annual goals. This will provide each student with a quality IEP that is reflective of their abilities and the supports and services that will assist them is accessing the Common Core Learning Standards. New Teacher Study Group: A New teacher Study Group led by administration and instructional coach will focus on the underlying planning and instructional components that help support the mission and achieve the school vision. The group will meet monthly to discuss how students learn best and the academic and personal behaviors that result in students acting as collaborative and independent problem solvers. The group will explore questioning and discussion, active intellectual engagement, and formative assessment, and other important instructional initiatives from past years. Administration and the instructional coach will use the study group to facilitate intervisitation by pairing new teachers with experienced teachers based on discussions in the study group. District 21 Early Grades (K-2) Strengthening Instructional Practices of ICT Teams: District 21 and Brooklyn South Field Support Center Learning Leaders will be conducting six professional learning workshops for a pair of ICT teachers. The goal of these sessions is to strengthen the partnerships of general education and special education teachers so that the needs of students with IEPs can be more effectively met in an inclusive setting. The sessions will serve to not only increase the effectiveness of the pair of teacher attending by learning learning from different perspectives and best practices, but to reexamine and bolster the work done at the school level to strengthen the instructional practices of ICT Teams. One member of the pair is also a member of the Lead Instructional Team and will turn-key professional learning to Administrators, teachers and paraprofessionals SIT meets weekly Sept. 2018 - June 2019 Administrators, Teachers, and Paraprofessionals. Implementation Team SIT meets weekly. Administrators, teachers and paraprofessionals 6 Meetings from September to June Administration and School Mentoring Committee. 6 Sessions from September to June Administrators, Lead Instructional Team, Pair of ICT Teachers Administrators, Lead Instructional Team, Pair of ICT Teachers, ICT Teacher School-Wide 2018-19 CEP 31 the Instructional Team so that school-wide practices improve. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Four Parent Teacher Conferences (September, November, December, and March) will be held to share instructional initiatives. Monthly family engagement events during school, after school, and on Saturdays will allow parents to participate in magnet themed and other learning opportunities alongside their children. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. ● Contractual Professional Learning Time: 80 minutes weekly ● Contractual Family Engagement Time: 35 minutes weekly ● Contractual Professional Work Time: 40 minutes weekly ● Contractual Parent Teacher Conferences: 4 times per year ● Per Session Funding: Professional Learning Planning –Lead Instructional Team After School ● Per Diem Funding: substitute coverage for professional learning for pedagogues outside of the building ● Per Diem Funding: substitute coverage for common planning activities ● OTPS Funding: curriculum materials, supplemental materials, classroom supplies, furniture, technology, educational software ● OTPS Funding: Curriculum and staff development partnerships (ASD Nest) ● Scheduling: common planning ● Scheduling: enrichment periods and advisory periods ● Scheduling: team meetings ● Scheduling: AIS support ● Borough Field Support Center: Support Specialists ● District Support Personnel: Superintendent, Principal Leadership Facilitator, FSC Liaison, TDEC Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant 2018-19 CEP 32  X C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind X Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019 two-thirds of all students with IEPs in Grades 4 - 8 will meet or exceed school designated mid-year benchmark ‘growth target’ scores as measured by Mock New York City ELA Exam. Mid-year benchmark ‘growth target' for State Exams: Benchmark Proficiency Score + ((100 – Baseline Proficiency Score) x .1) The Growth Target Formula can be applied to periodic assessments allowing progress to be monitored throughout the year, making it an internal accountability measure for all students incorporated into the goal. By using this internal growth measurement, instead of New York State growth models, growth is measured against a student’s previous performance. It is not measured in comparison to peers. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. New York City Mock ELA Benchmark (February) will be the specific instrument of measure used to assess progress. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 33  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. STRENGTHS: Written actionable feedback is provided to teachers in a timely fashion following all observations. Initial Planning Conferences, Mid-Year Meetings, and Summative End-of-Year Conferences create a cyclical nature or goal setting and benchmarking through collaborative conversation resulting in improvement of pedagogical practices school-wide. NEEDS: Simplified specific actionable next steps need to be monitored by administration using the Research based teacher rubric (Danielson 2013) and other means. Student work and assessment data needs to play a more prominent role in the feedback and next steps. More collaborative low stakes hands-on observations, classroom visits, with support and concrete, specific, actionable feedback needs to be provided to support growth in instructional practices. Teachers need to be able to innovate and take risks outside of the narrow scope of the 8 of 22 rubric components that are used to evaluate teachers. Innovative practices need to be attempted and analyzed using inquiry based approaches so that new ways are found to meet students with diverse needs, included SWDs. The data to support this needs assessment are as follows: The percentage of students in grades 3 - 8 at level 3 and 4 on the New York State Math exam has increased 26 points from 2013 - 2018. The increase from 2017 - 2018 was 11 points. In 2018 58% of students were at proficiency. There are still a significant portion of students not at proficiency. The data indicated that students in Grades 5 - 7 did not have as significant of gains. From 2014 - 2018 there has been inconsistency and fluctuation in proficiency. ENL students increased from 4% to 34% proficient in Mathematics from 2013 - 2018. ENL students had a 15 percentage point gain from 2017 to 2018. Although ENL Students experienced significant gains in proficiency there is a need for administration to to focus on curriculum, instructional, and pedagogical development for Grades 3 -8 that meets the language and vocabulary needs of ENL Students and sustains success in foundational years while academic demands become more rigorous, challenging, and complex for students.'' The gap between students with ELLs and general education students decreased by 6 percentage points from 2017 - 2018, but is still a gap of 30 percentage points. 2018-19 CEP 34  Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019 administration will provide actionable feedback aligned with collaboratively written teacher goals leading to increased student achievement as evidenced by two-thirds of all ELLs in Grades K - 8 meeting or exceeding school designated ‘growth target’ scores as measured by New York City Performance Tasks for Math. Growth Target Formula for New York City Performance Tasks: Proficiency Rating+ ((100 – Proficiency Rating) x .2) The Growth Target Formula can be applied to periodic assessments allowing progress to be monitored throughout the year, making it an internal accountability measure for all students incorporated into the goal. By using this internal growth measurement, instead of New York State growth models, growth is measured against a student’s previous performance. It is not measured in comparison to peers. The formula can also be applied to measure progress of students in Grades K -3 using curriculum created baselines and benchmarks. 2018-19 CEP 35  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Collaborative Goal Tracking and Administrative Evaluation: All teachers May 2018 - June 2019 Administration Cycles of observations culminate in Summative End-of-Year Conferences conducted by administration. At each conference in May-June 2018 a streamlined goal was written in collaboration. The Goals were aligned with the Danielson Rubric and teacher evaluations from the 2017 - 2018 school year. These goals were revisited in September-October Initial Planning and refined if necessary. Written goals are transparently shared via email to teachers as a reminder following conferences, and are recoded in a shared document that is accessible to both school administrators. Written evidence and feedback provided through the observation process will reference these goals and be entered into the shared document so that administration can analyze trends and areas of focus that impact large groups of teachers. A focus will be on how ENL students are access curriculum and the impact on their learning. Professional Learning Share Notes: All teachers May 2018 - June 2019 Administration For the past 3 years "Weekly Professional Learning Notes" have been sent to teachers every Friday. These notes serve the larger purpose of ensuring that important information and discussions regarding curriculum, instruction and pedagogy is disseminated school-wide. The notes are generated by administration and the supportive information is derived from Lead Instructional Team Meetings, Grade Meetings, Common Planning, District 21/FSC Meetings (turn-keyed), and individual teacher meetings (i.e. post observation conferences. Notes provide insight and support for teachers regarding improving instructional practices to support the needs of all learners. Professional Learning Community (PLC): The Lead Instructional Team will meet weekly to coordinate all professional learning. The team will generate weekly share notes distributed every Friday as a means of communicating a Administration, teachers, and paraprofessionals Sept. 2018 through June 2019 All pedagogical staff, administration, and the Lead Instructional Team. The Team consists 2018-19 CEP 36 of coaches, mentors, and specialists from all grade levels and key content areas of the school. Administration and ENL teachers, and classroom teachers Sept. 2018 - June 2019 The Principal and ENL teachers will meet monthly. cohesive professional learning plan. Cycles of learning will be facilitated in three teacher groups with vertical representation across K -8, with a goal of distributing leadership within each group as the cycles progress. The team will also continue to focus on the instructional priorities and past instructional learning to increase capacity to teach ENL Students and SWDs in an inclusive setting, as well as UDL strategies for providing access to diverse populations of students. The Professional Learning Handbook serves as a reference guide to past and present priorities. New Teacher Study Group: A New teacher Study Group led by administration and instructional coach will focus on the underlying planning and instructional components that help achieve support the mission and achieve the school vision and mission. The group will meet monthly to discuss how students learn best and the academic and personal behaviors that result in students acting as collaborative and independent problem solvers. The group will explore questioning and discussion, active intellectual engagement, and formative assessment, and other important instructional initiatives from past years. Administration and the instructional coach will use the study group to facilitate intervisitation by pairing new teachers with experienced teachers based on discussions in the study group. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Four Parent Teacher Conferences (September, November, December, and March) will be held to share instructional initiatives. Monthly family engagement events during school, after school, and on Saturdays will allow parents to participate in magnet themed and other learning opportunities alongside their children. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. ● Contractual Professional Learning Time: 80 minutes weekly ● Contractual Family Engagement Time: 35 minutes weekly ● Contractual Professional Work Time: 40 minutes weekly ● Contractual Parent Teacher Conferences: 4 times per year 2018-19 CEP 37  ● Per Session Funding: Professional Learning Planning –Lead Instructional Team After School ● Per Diem Funding: substitute coverage for professional learning for pedagogues outside of the building ● Per Diem Funding: substitute coverage for common planning activities ● OTPS Funding for Contracted Agencies: Marquis Studio ● OTPS Funding: curriculum materials, supplemental materials, classroom supplies, furniture, technology, educational software OTPS Funding: transportation and admission fees for trips ● OTPS Funding: Curriculum and staff development partnerships (ASD Nest) ● Grant Funding for Partnerships: NIA ● Scheduling: common planning ● Scheduling: enrichment periods and advisory periods ● Scheduling: team meetings ● Scheduling: AIS support ● Borough Field Support Center: Support Specialists ● District Support Personnel: Superintendent, PLF, FSC Liaison, TDEC ● Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019 two-thirds of all ELLs in Grades K - 8 will meet or exceed school designated mid-year benchmark ‘growth target’ scores as measured by New York City Performance Tasks in Math. Mid-year benchmark ‘growth target for Performance Tasks: Benchmark Proficiency Score + ((100 – Baseline Proficiency Score) x .1) The Growth Target Formula can be applied to periodic assessments allowing progress to be monitored throughout the year, making it an internal accountability measure for all students incorporated into the goal. By using this 2018-19 CEP 38  internal growth measurement, instead of New York State growth models, growth is measured against a student’s previous performance. It is not measured in comparison to peers. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. New York City Performance Task in ELA (October) and Benchmark (February) will be the specific instrument of measure used to assess progress. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 39  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. STRENGTH: During the 2015-2016 school year, a growing and evolving Communications Team consisting of administrators, teachers, parent coordinator, and guidance counselor scheduled regular parent events and coordinated with staff and contracted partnerships to provide regular family workshops and events resulting in increased family engagement. In the 2016 - 2017 school year this team was re-purposed, renamed, and expanded into the Student and Family Events Team. This was done to increase the scope of the work of the team and incorporate a wider range of input and voice from the staff. NEED: Although most parent workshops have had an academic focus, regular workshops with connections to the school vision and mission and CCLS expectations need to be conducted to support parents in raising academic achievement. Additional times for workshops, including multiple Saturdays need to be offered to increase attendance and involvement. A more formalized schedule and format for workshops needs to be created to generate repeat attendance and involvement. Occasional "Breakfast With The Principal" meetings have been coordinated by the PTA. These open forums have been successful and need to be expanded. The data to support this needs assessment are as follows: On the 2017- 2018 New York City Learning Environment Survey, all parent survey responses in relation to "Strong Family-Community Ties" we at or above the city average with the exception of two. All parent survey responses in relation to "Strong Family-Community Ties" received 95% positive responses with the exception of three. The three questions related to having "the opportunity to volunteer time to support their school," likelihood attending "a general school meeting or school event," and communicating "with their child's teacher about their child's performance." With this in mind there is a need for regular parent discussion groups, in addition to Parent Teacher Association Meetings, to share information with families about volunteering opportunities and communicating about performance. The gap between students with disabilities and general education students decreased by 9 percentage points from 2017 - 2018. The gap is still 10 percentage points. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the 2018-19 CEP 40  identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019 family and community support strategies, including translation and parent discussion groups, will lead to increased student achievement as evidenced by to two-thirds of all Hispanic students in Grades 4 - 8 meeting or exceeding school designated ‘growth target’ scores as measured by New York State ELA Exams. Growth Target Formula for New York State Exams: Proficiency Rating+ ((100 – Proficiency Rating) x .2) The Growth Target Formula can be applied to periodic assessments allowing progress to be monitored throughout the year, making it an internal accountability measure for all students incorporated into the goal. By using this internal growth measurement, instead of New York State growth models, growth is measured against a student’s previous performance. It is not measured in comparison to peers. The formula can also be applied to measure progress of students in Grades K -3 using curriculum created baselines and benchmarks. 2018-19 CEP 41  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Parent Teacher Association (PTA) Discssion Groups: All families 10 PTA Meetings and 6 Parent Discussion Groups PTA, Parent Coordinator, Translators, Administration. The incoming PTA Executive Board in conjunction with the Parent coordinator will host monthly discussions (in addition to regular PTA meetings) inviting administration and staff to discuss topics generated by families. At both regular PTA meeting and Parent Discussion Groups key talking points will be scripted/written and translated into Spanish, and a Spanish Translator will also read what is scripted, so that what is shared in English orally and in writing will match what is shared orally and in writing in Spanish. As the translation systems that provide consistency with this process are established and improved they will be adapted to the Student and Family Events Team. Student and Family Events/Engagement: A Student and Family Events Team will work to schedule, communicate and plan student and family events and formalize school-wide incentives for students that will both make the demands of a rigorous and challenging academic environment feel safe and supportive. The team will develop incentives criteria for academic performance and progress and meeting social-emotional expectations; including incentives for attendance, report card grades, developing literacy and math skills, and complying with dress code mandates. Monthly family engagement events during school, after school, and on Saturdays will allow parents to participate in magnet themed and other learning opportunities alongside their children, resulting in a school environment where students feel supported and challenged. The Team will also plan and facilitate yearly family events such as The Cultural Unity Banquet and Thanksgivings Feast. The Team will meet regularly and coordinate calendars for events. Additional family engagement events will focus on literacy by providing time for parents to engage in reading activities with their children. Literacy events will be provided in additional languages to support families that speak languages other than English at home, with a focus Spanish Speaking Families. A bilingual teacher will conduct Spanish Classes for Families. Staff Families and Students Sept 2018 through June 2019 The Student and Family Events Team is comprised of Administrators, Teachers, Guidance Counselors Parent Coordinator, Programmer, Pupil Accounting Secretary. 2018-19 CEP 42  3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. Four Parent Teacher Conferences (September, November, December, and March) will be held to share instructional initiatives. Monthly family engagement events during school, after school, and on Saturdays will allow parents to participate in magnet themed and other learning opportunities alongside their children. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. ● Contractual Professional Learning Time: 80 minutes weekly ● Contractual Family Engagement Time: 35 minutes weekly ● Contractual Professional Work Time: 40 minutes weekly ● Contractual Parent Teacher Conferences: 4 times per year ● Per Session Funding: Professional Learning Planning –Lead Instructional Team After School ● Per Diem Funding: substitute coverage for professional learning for pedagogues outside of the building ● Per Diem Funding: substitute coverage for common planning activities ● OTPS Funding for Contracted Agencies: Marquis Studio ● OTPS Funding: curriculum materials, supplemental materials, classroom supplies, furniture, technology, educational software OTPS Funding: transportation and admission fees for trips ● OTPS Funding: Curriculum and staff development partnerships (ASD Nest) ● Grant Funding for Partnerships: NIA ● Scheduling: common planning ● Scheduling: enrichment periods and advisory periods ● Scheduling: team meetings ● Scheduling: AIS support 2018-19 CEP 43  ● Borough Field Support Center: Support Specialists ● District Support Personnel: Principal Leadership Facilitator District Principals: support through intervisitation Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019 two-thirds of all Hispanic students in Grades 4 - 8 will meet or exceed school mid-year benchmark ‘growth target’ scores as measured by Mock New York City Math Exams. Mid-year benchmark ‘growth target' for Mock State Exams: Benchmark Proficiency Score + ((100 – Baseline Proficiency Score) x .1) The Growth Target Formula can be applied to periodic assessments allowing progress to be monitored throughout the year, making it an internal accountability measure for all students incorporated into the goal. By using this internal growth measurement, instead of New York State growth models, growth is measured against a student’s previous performance. It is not measured in comparison to peers. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Mock New York State Math Benchmark (February) Exams will be the specific instrument of measure used to assess progress. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 44  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Inadequate progress towards meeting promotional standards as defined by Chancellor’s Regulation A-501 Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) Targeted Support for Grades – K-8 (ESL Teacher/ Licensed Common Branchesor ELA RTI - Scaffolded Support, Flexible Grouping, Differentiated Instruction, Small Group Instruction – K-8 When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) During the School Day Lunch Time Support After School Teacher) - push-in nd pull-out. Push In/Pull Out Support Mathematics Science After School Support Elementary Cluster Teacher Licensed Content Area Teacher in Science andMath Embed Content and Curriculum Support - push-in nd pull-out. After School Support Elementary Cluster Teacher Licensed Content Area Teacher in Science and ELA Embed/integrate Inadequate progress towards meeting promotional standards as defined by Chancellor’s Regulation A-501 Inadequate progress towards meeting promotional standards as defined by Chancellor’s Regulation A-501 RTI - Scaffolded Support, Flexible Grouping, Differentiated Instruction, Small Group Instruction – K-8 Push In/Pull Out Support Small Group Instruction During the School Day Lunch Time Support After School During the School Day Lunch Time Support 2018-19 CEP 45  Social Studies Inadequate progress towards meeting promotional standards as defined by Chancellor’s Regulation A-501 At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Determined by the appropriate support provider using specific assessments and evaluations. After School During the School Day Lunch Time Support After School During the School Day Progress is monitored every 6 weeks Small Group Instruction One-to-One Small Groups Content and Curriculum Support- push-in After School Support Licensed Content Area Teacher in Social Studies and ELA Embed Content and Curriculum Support Enrichment/Supportpush-in Services Provided by the Guidance Counselor and the Social Worker. Students are referred by their teachers or parents for social/emotional issues or concerns that may be affecting the students’ performance at school. - push-in nd pull-out. After School Support 2018-19 CEP 46  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 1 student is reported as STH. 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. The school will distribute, manage, and track Metrocards for students and for those parents who accompany their children to school. The school will monitor and improve attendance through continued communication with families and provide guidance counselor support. The school will provide school supplies for families in need. The school will seek outside resources and partnerships for families in need. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 CEP 47  N/A 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. N/A 2018-19 CEP 48  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. ● Administration will collaborate with Borough and District Personnel to ensure that non-HQT meet all required documentation and assessment guidelines. ● Title I funding will be utilized to support teachers in becoming Highly Qualified Teachers. ● Mentors will provide support for teachers that are not Highly Qualified. ● Administration will collaborate with Borough and District Personnel to seek Highly Qualified Teachers when positions are open. ● Administration will create candidate evaluation committees to identify and interview candidates when a position is available. ● During reorganization the administration will utilize teacher license information to ensure that the assignment matches the teacher’s license area. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). ● The Professional Learning Community that was established in the 2013 – 2014 school year continues to develop and evolve in order to include all teachers and paraprofessionals in meaningful and productive professional learning. Weekly meetings are facilitated by Instructional Team Members using facilitation guides. The Instructional Team also uses the structure of the established Professional Learning Community to further develop assessment practices and analysis of student work, to ensure/increase rigor, and refine the School-Wide Instructional Focus. ● Regularly scheduled Instructional Rounds will facilitate inter-visitation allowing all teachers to view and share best practices with other teachers. Formal sharing of Best Practices will take place during Professional Development in the fall and spring terms. Debriefing notes from Instructional Rounds are triangulated with teacher evaluation feedback, Instructional Team feedback, and PLC topics, and disseminated to the entire staff. 2018-19 CEP 49  ● Common Planning time will be utilized to analyze and adjust curriculum to ensure that it is aligned to the CCLS. ● Instructional Coaches will support teachers and paraprofessionals in analyzing and adjusting curriculum to ensure that it is aligned to the CCLS. ● Professional Development on the new CCLS aligned curriculums will be provided to support the retention of Highly Qualified Teachers. ● Professional Learning Communities will be utilized to support growth of teachers and paraprofessionals . Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). ● Curriculum o Our Pre-Kindergarten program prepares students for the transition to elementary school by providing rich and varied learning experiences that lay the foundation for college and career readiness. Our literacy curriculum supports the age appropriate development of early literacy skills, with a focus on phonics, phonemic awareness, fluency, comprehension and vocabulary development. In mathematics, students are encouraged to demonstrate awareness and competence in mathematical practices. ● Professional Development o Teachers attend regular professional development during Pre-K non-attendance days provided by the NYCDOE. Topics include:  Common Core standards 2018-19 CEP 50   Social and Emotional Growth  Creating Partnerships With Parents ● In addition, parents are offered workshops provided by our Social Worker. She serves as a liaison between the parents and the school to further ease the transition to elementary school. Topics include: o Transition to Kindergarten (parents meet the Kindergarten Teachers and learn about expectations) o Child Development o Social and Emotional Growth o Extending Learning to the Home ● Sharing Information o Each June, Pre-Kindergarten teachers and Kindergarten teachers are given the opportunity to meet and discuss the needs of the students transitioning to Kindergarten. ● Early Intervention Students receiving early intervention services undergo evaluation prior to entering the elementary grades. The needs of each individual child are addressed and services are offered accordingly. In addition, we work with community based organizations to further support the transition for students. 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. ● A Measures of Student Learning (MOSL) committee was created to review assessments used to assess student progress. ● The Instructional Team, Common Planning structures, and PLC time are used in a distributive leadership capacity to examine assessments and facilitate professional development and turn-keying. ● The Instructional Team Common Planning structures and PLC time are used to examine curricula including assessment components. ● Common Planning structures are utilized to examine student work and assessment results to track progress. ● Teachers participate in Annual IEP meetings, 3 Year Re-evaluations, Initial Evaluations, PPT Meetings, and NEST Team Meetings, where in addition to collaborating, they have an opportunity to discuss the effectiveness of shared strategies. ● Instructional Leads will attend professional development and turn-key information at Grade/Academy meetings. All Teachers in grades K through 8 will administer, assess, and analyze the results of curricula/periodic assessments in conjunction in order to plan targeted instruction for struggling students by adjusting instructional practices, and develop additional supports and strategies. 2018-19 CEP 51  ● Teachers will use and modify curricula aligned rubrics and/or scoring guides to accurately assess the level of student work. They will thus be active in the assessment process and the evaluation of the effectiveness of the strategies . 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) 240,951.00 35,625.00 12,366.00 0 2,229,253.00 X X X X X Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Column B Section Reference(s) 5A, 5B, 5C, 5D, 5E 5A, 5C 5A, 5B, 5C, 5D N/A 5A, 5B, 5C, 5D, 5E Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages: 2018-19 CEP 52   Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 CEP 53  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Parent Involvement Policy (PIP) Public School 121 5301 20 th Avenue Brooklyn, New York 11204 Tel: # 718-377-8845 Fax: 718-252-4075 Anthony Mungioli, Principal Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in our school. Therefore, our school, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Elementary and Secondary School (ESSA) Act, is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between our school and the families. Our school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of our school community. Our school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. 2018-19 CEP 54  Our school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of our school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. Our school will support parents and families of Title I students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of our school community; Parental Involvement and School Quality To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, our school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to schools to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in our Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; 2018-19 CEP 55  ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend our school and will work to ensure that our school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability grade-level curriculum and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, Progress Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Elementary and Secondary School Act; ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings, with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement Our school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: 2018-19 CEP 56  ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between /teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand; School-Parent Compact (SPC) School-Parent Compact (SPC) Public School 121 5301 20 th Avenue Brooklyn, New York 11204 Tel: # 718-377-8845 Fax: 718-252-4075 Anthony Mungioli, Principal Our school, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Elementary and Secondary School (ESSA) Act, is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards and Assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum 2018-19 CEP 57  I. School Responsibilities Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Elementary and Secondary School (ESSA) Act; Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; 2018-19 CEP 58  ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; Provide general support to parents by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Elementary and Secondary School Act Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities: II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; 2018-19 CEP 59  ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by promptly reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; III. Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; always try my best to learn 2018-19 CEP 60  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 2018-19 CEP 61  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: The goal of PS 121's Title III program is to provide a rigorous, standards-based data driven supplemental program for ELL students that will enable them to meet or exceed City and State performance standards. The objective of the program is to implement an effective supplemental ESL program that will result in a 5% increase in the number of ELLs making adequate yearly gains in English as measured by the NYSESLAT. A review of standardized test scores, including the New York State ELA, Math and Science exams, demonstrate that ELL students are scoring far below their English speaking peers in ELA as well as the content areas. NYSESLAT results demonstrate reading and writing as areas of need. Based on student need, PS 121 will offer an after school supplemental enrichment program for ELL students in grades K-8. For the 2018-2019 and 2019-2020 school years, the students will meet twice a week, after school, for ninety minute sessions, from 2:25 PM to 3:45 PM. For the 2018-2019 school year the program will meet from October 17, 2018 through May 20, 2019. For the 2019-2020 school year, the program will follow a similar calendar. The program's focus will be supplemental math, literacy and science instruction. Mathematics materials will include "Approach and Connect, as well as reinforcement of math standards through the use of the Go Math program." Literacy materials will include programs designed to improve listening, speaking, reading and writing skills of ELLs. For early childhood ELLs, students will be exposed to Fundations, a systematic program in critical foundational skills emphasizing phonics/word study, phonemic awareness, vocabulary and comprehension. Upper grade ELLs will focus on comprehension and word study through academic vocabulary strategies. In addition, Students will participate in hands on, experiential learning that integrates applied life sciences in line with our magnet theme. Students will also engage in activities designed to improve performance on the NYSESLAT, including "Getting Ready for the NYSESLAT and Beyond." The materials utilized in the Title III program are supplemental and are distinct from those used in daily instruction. Home language support will include bilingual glossaries for math and science, as well as the use of translation software as needed. Subgroups and grade levels to be served All ELL students in grades K-8 will be served, with instruction targeted to the needs of the students Schedule and duration The program will meet twice a week (Wednesdays and Thursdays), from October, 2018 through May, 2019, from 2:20PM to 3:45 PM. Attendance will be taken for each session and records maintained in the main office. Parent notification letters will be translated into high incidence languages by school staff (Spanish, Chinese, Uzbek). 2018-19 CEP 62  Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: Well-planned, ongoing professional development sessions will support language development for the Title III students. Professional development will be targeted to meet the needs of the teachers and ELL students. In an effort to maximize resources and maximize personnel exposed to learning experiences designed to improve teaching and learning for all ELLs, ELL professional development sessions will be part of the school’s regularly scheduled program and offered at no cost to the Title III program. Teachers to be trained: ESL Teachers, Ms. Randazzo, Ms. Huertas and Ms. Chan Science Teacher, Ms. Cottrell Environmental Studies Teacher, Jose Montanez Classroom Teachers Content area teachers Schedule and duration: Title III Professional development sessions will be scheduled in November 2018, February 2019 and March 2019. Topics to be covered: New York State Common Core Learning Standards ESL Methodologies Integrating ESL strategies into Content Area instruction Data Driven Instruction Co-Teaching Strategies Name of provider: NYC Department of Education - DELLSSS and other offices, Brooklyn South Field Office, District 21 All ELL teachers working the Title III program will participate in ongoing PD, including topics such as Effective Co-Teaching, Critical Thinking, and other ELL specific methodologies. They will turnkey the information to all staff through our Monday Professional Development opportunities. The Professional development activities will positively impact the progress of ELLs. For each professional development session, agendas and attendance sheets will be available and records maintained in the main office. Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered 2018-19 CEP 63  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Begin description here: For all Title III Parent Engagement activities, translators will be made available in high incidence languages (Chinese, Uzbek, and Spanish) Through an informal needs analysis conducted throughout the 2017-2018 school year, the following parent engagement activities will be conducted: Resources to assist children at home Common Core Learning Standards and the ELL child Communicating with the school and with teachers Name of provider: Parent Coordinator - Loretta Bravata ESL Teachers - Lucille Randazzo, Leonarda Huertas, Mei Yin Chan Literacy Coach - Carolyn Cottrell How parents will be notified of these activities: Parents of Title III students, as well as parents of ELLs will be invited to all sessions and will be notified in the following ways: Flyers sent home translated into high incidence languages Follow-up telephone calls There will be three Parent Engagement workshops, November 2018, February 2019, and May 2019. The sessions will last for one hour and will be scheduled at times convenient to the parents. Records will be maintained in the main office, including agendas, attendance sheets, and invitations translated into high incidence languages. Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits)  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. 2018-19 CEP 64 Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL 2018-19 CEP 65  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 21 School Name Nelson A Rockefeller Borough Brooklyn School Number 121 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Anthony Mungioli Coach Carolyn Cottrell ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Lucille Randazzo/ENL Teacher Teacher/Subject Area Mei Chan/ENL Teacher/Subject Area Leonarda Huertas/ENL Related-Service Provider Stephanie Cohen/SLP Superintendent Isabel DiMola Assistant Principal Lisa Giuliano Coach School Counselor Kelly Grogan-Femiano Parent Christine Schneider Parent Coordinator Loretta Bravata Field Support Center Staff Member Nelly Cortes Other (Name and Title) C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 2 5 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 336 2018-19 CEP 66 Total number of ELLs 79 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 23.51%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Lang. N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 4 0 0 0 3 0 0 0 2 0 0 0 5 0 0 0 6 0 0 0 7 0 0 0 8 0 0 0 9 0 0 0 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? Our school uses TCRWP to assess the early literacy skills of all students, including our ELLs. Our analysis of the data shows that ELLs typically score lower than their English speaking peers. Currently, 19% of our ELL students are reading on grade level independently. As a result, we have put in place initiatives that seek to close that gap. Our teachers implement phonics and phonemic awareness activities into their daily literacy blocks. They also provide ELLs with scaffolded, small group instruction based on their individual needs ELL students are also assessed regularly through our literacy curricula, ReadyGen and Expeditionary Learning. Module assessments and Unit assessments are administered and data analyzed to determine progress. Classroom and ENL teachers then make instructional decisions that support students. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? 2018-19 CEP 67  There are several structures in place to support our assessment and instructional efforts for ENL students. Data is regularly collected and analyzed on a schoolwide level. The instructional team then makes schoolwide decisions based on trends. Grade level structures in place include common planning time where ENL teachers and classroom teachers meet weekly. At these weekly meetings, teachers analyze student work and make instructional decisions for the grade. Finally, Classroom teachers develop scaffolds as needed to ensure ENL students have access to the curriculum and are making progress towards proficiency. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? The success of the ELL program will be evaluated regularly by school leaders, in conjunction with the ENL teachers. They will examine all available data, both summative and formative, including NYS ELA, Math and Science assessments, curriculum embedded performance based assessments and Independent Reading Levels. They use that information to inform curricula and instructional decisions and provide targeted support as needed to groups of ELLs that are performing below standards. Identified areas of need are phonics/phonemic awareness for early childhood ELL students. They will assess the rate in which ELL parents participate in school events and determine methods to increase involvement. Further, the Inquiry Team will work to align the school's curriculum to the Instructional Shifts inherent in the Common Core State Standards. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? We provide targeted support in English Language Arts and Mathematics to students that require additional support in grades K-8. Students are identified based on data analysis of ELA and Math state exams and other classroom summative assessments administered throughout the year. Groups are flexible, and as students make progress, groups are adjusted, with additional students targeted as needed. Student progress is tracked throughout the year to determine the effectiveness of the supports and to modify when necessary. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] For each English language learner who does not make adequate yearly progress (AYP) on the annual English language proficiency assessment, or who scores a Level 1 or 2 on NYS assessments, the school determines additional support services to be provided the student that are aligned to the Academic Intervention Services provided to all students. The school considers factors such as proficiency exam results, ENL and content area teacher recommendations, parent requests and student work products. When ELL students are identified as having academic difficulty, we use a three tiered approach to providing instructional support and intervention, in line with the RTI framework. We examine current performance, provide support using research based strategies, and partner with the family to ensure students receive the necessary support in order to succeed academically. Student progress is tracked to determine benefits of supports. Student progress within AIS is monitored through curriculum based assessments, including Performance Based Assessments through a "Looking at Student Work" protocol. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. For the 2016 administration of the NYSESLAT, the majority of our students scored at the Expanding Level (67.4%). Areas of strength were speaking and writing. Areas of weakness were reading and listening. An increased emphasis on listening skills, particularly oral comprehension of lengthy complex texts, will be incorporated into the ENL instructional program. Fall 2016 NYSITELL data demonstrates a range of proficiency levels for our Kindergarten new admits. Eleven students were assessed and entitled. Seven scored EN/EM and 4 scored TR/EX. New admits from other grades scored at the entering level. These results indicate that our kindergarten students were exposed to English prior to beginning kindergarten (pre-kindergarten, daycare, etc) and that this exposure is beneficial to the development of language proficiency. Only 17 of our ELL students took the NYS ELA exam. One student scored a level 3. Eleven scored a level 2 and 5 scored a level 2018-19 CEP 68  1. A majority of the Level 1 students are long term ELL students with disabilities. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? The findings are discussed at staff meetings at the start of the school year. They are also discussed at grade meetings and with individual teachers. The instructional team also reviews the data to make adjustments to the instructional program, determining instructional initiatives as well as facilitating professional development aligned to the instructional initiatives. Teachers also follow a "Looking at Student Work" protocol to assess student mastery of standards and determine specific instructional supports to put in place. They also reflect on pedagogical changes that may be necessary to move students closer to independent mastery of standards. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. The school’s licensed ESL teachers provides instruction to English Language Learners through a Freestanding ENL program. All entitled students in grades K-8 participate, with students programmed for ENL classes as mandated by CR- Part 154 (determined by the NYSITELL or NYSESLAT scores). Students who score at the entering and emerging level are programmed for 8 periods a week of ENL instruction (4 periods of stand alone and 4 periods of integrated). Students who score at the transitional and expanding level are programmed for 4 periods of Integrated Co Teaching and commanding students are provided with 2 periods of integrated co-teaching a week. The ENL teacher "pushes in" to each classroom for 4 periods of integrated instruction during the ELA periods. Students are heterogeneously grouped (mixed proficiency levels) for Integrated services and homogeneously grouped for Stand Alone services (Entering and Emerging). Students are provided with pull out ENL instruction in grade bands - K, 1-2, 3-4, 5-6, 7-8. b. TBE program. If applicable. not applicable c. DL program. If applicable. not applicable 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? ENL services are provided by Ms. Randazzo, Ms Chan, Ms. Huertas and Ms. Spear, the ENL teachers. Students scoring at the Entering or Emerging levels receive 360 minutes of ENL instruction weekly, while those students scoring at the Transitional and Expanding level sreceive 180 minutes of ENL instruction weekly. Students scoring at the Commanding Level receive 90 minutes of instruction weekly. Instructional minutes are provided as per CR Part 154 mandates. The school's Data Specialist enters services into STARSClassroom and the Field Support Office regularly sends compliance reports to indicate whether or not mandated services have been accurately captured by STARS. Any necessary adjustments are 2018-19 CEP 69  made. The ENL program is aligned with, and supports, the comprehensive core curriculum in both literacy and mathematics. Most classroom teachers have had training in ENL methodologies and prepare content area lessons with these strategies in mind. Those that have not had the required training are in the process of being trained by the school's ENL Teachers. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. ESL Instruction is content-based and aligned to the Common Core State Standards. All teachers, including the ESL teachers, are implementing CCLS aligned literacy programs across all grade levels. Through Integrated/Stand Alone instruction, students engage in close reading and respond to text-based questions on a daily basis. We place an emphasis on ensuring students regularly engage in thought provoking conversations based on shared texts, allowing our ELLs to develop speaking and listening skills along side reading and writing skills. All classrooms are stocked with grade-appropriate reading materials for use in literacy activities as well as the integration of curriculum areas into literacy. Our teachers provide ELL students with scaffolds to support their developing language skills in order to make content comprehensible and enrich language instruction. We use native language support to the extent possible for our literacy program, particularly in the middle school. Each literacy module focuses on a shared text that serves as the springboard for classroom activities and assessments. We provide students with translated versions when possible so that they may continue to develop literacy skills as they participate in listening speaking reading and writing activities with their peers. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? In the ENL program we assist our beginner ELLs that are new entrants to our school from another country by using informal assessments conducted by our teachers that speak the student language. This helps us by tapping into what the student knows so that we can build on the skills they have. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status a. The instructional plan for SIFE students is as follows: SIFE students will receive intensive literacy instruction using a research based program such as Orton Gillingham. SIFE students will participate in ESL classes, with instruction differentiated by content, process and product, to meet idividual student needs. b. Students just arriving into an English Speaking School System are supported in a variety of ways. “Newcomers” are often paired with a buddy in their classroom. The buddy, preferably someone who speaks the same native language, assists the newcomers in completing classroom tasks. In addition, instruction is scaffolded, as these students require support in order to access the curriculum and meet the New York State Common Core Learing Standards. Scaffolding techniques such as Modeling, Bridging, and Schema Building are incorporated into daily lessons to support ELL students. c. In addition to the mandated ESL instruction, ELLs with 4-6 years of service are supported at the school. These students are given AIS services in Literacy, Math, Science and/or Social Studies as needed. We also recommend that they attend after school programs, specifically the school's Title III program. Further, the students are tracked regularly at our Academic Intervention Services meetings. Teachers provide ELL's with scaffolded support to ensure students have access to the challenging curriculum. Scaffolds can include technological support, audiobooks, and other instructional supports. d. Long Term ELLs (students in an ESL Program for more than six years) are provided similar services as the ELLs with 4-6 years. 2018-19 CEP 70  Further, if adequate progress is not made, students are examined on an individual basis by the AIS Team in an attempt to determine if a referral for a special education evaluation is necessary. Scaffolds can include technological support, audiobooks, and other instructional supports. e. Students achieving the Commanding level in English based on the NYSESLAT are placed in a transitional program for two years. These children continue to be provided with support and services to maintain progress and student achievement in their classroom. Support is scaffolded, and as students demonstrate the ability to work independent of support, it is removed. Activities designed to support transitional students are: • After School Program, offering academic support in reading and math. • Academic Intervention Services during the school day. Services offered to transitional students are monitored by the Academic Intervention Team and are individualized based on each student’s need. Students are removed from the transitional program when they perform at or above Level 3 on City and State Standardized Assessments. Transitional students also receive test modifications such as extended time and use of glossaries for up to two years after they are no longer entitled. . 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? Our ELL-SWD students have access to the same common core aligned curriculum, recommended by New York City, (ReadyGen for grades K-2 Literacy, Expeditionary Learning for grades 3-8 Literacy GoMath for grades K-5 Math and CMP3 Math for grades 6-8) as their peers. The programs include specific supports for ELLs and SWD and teachers differentiate lessons to meet the needs of all students and ensure they are making progress towards the standards. In addition the programs place an emphasis on developing vocabulary through a variety of strategies. Our SWD ELLs are provided with their IEP mandated services. The Principal and the IEP coordinator ensure all mandated services are received. ESL Services are provided to all ELL SWD's in accordance with their IEPs and Part 154 mandates. In addition, for students that require bilingual settings that are not available, alternate placement paraprofessionals have been assigned and support the language needs of those students. Our ELL SWD's also make use of technology to support their needs. Each student has access to Razz Kids and iReady, technology based programs that support reading and writing skills through a systematic approach.. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? Our ELL~SWD students enjoy a flexible schedule designed to meet their individual needs and provide the least restrictive environment. Students are evaluated by the School Assessment Team to determine individual needs and placed in appropriate programs. We seek to place children in the Lease restrictive environment and currently have ICT classes on each grade from grades K-3. We also provide SETSS services through a Push In model, either one period a day or two, for students that need more intensive support. Some students also work with classroom Paraprofessionals as well. All ELL~SWD have access to the same curriculum as other students in the school, with instruction differentiated to meet the needs of each students. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. Targeted Intervention services are provided to all students. including ELLs, by AIS Literacy, AIS Math, At Risk and content area teachers. These teachers work with small groups of students to develop literacy and math skills using assessment data to determine individual needs. Analysis of NYS ELA and Math data show that ELL students are significantly behind their English speaking peers in ELA and performing below their English speaking peers in Math. (See data section) Targeted Intervention services in Science and Social Studies are provided by content area teachers to small groups of ELL students that require 2018-19 CEP 71  additional support. For students that benefit from native language support, materials are available. We are currently targeting the following subgroups - ELL's with Disabilities and long term ELLs. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? With the changes in the NYSESLAT, students are expected to listen to lengthy, complex texts and demonstrate comprehension of what they heard. This is a new expectation for our students. Therefore we will improve instruction by providing students with additional opportunities to listen to complex texts. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? We have not had a bilingual program 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. ELLs are afforded equal access to all school programs. Students are heterogeneously mixed across all grade levels. The school follows New York City's core curriculum for all students, including ELL's. We currently have a partnership with MOMA (Arts Education). ELL students participate in this programs. Further, all ELLs in grades K-8 are offered an after school program through Title III. The goal of the Title III program is to improve the literacy and math skills of our ELL students. Parents are notified of these opportunities, with written notices translated into high incidence languages. Identified staff members (see section 1) also call parents. ELL students are a part of our regular school population, therefore they are represented in all school programs. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. We use ReadyGen for literacy in grades K-2 and Expeditionary Learning for grades 3-8. The programs embed strategies to support ELLs. We also use GoMath for grades K-8, which includes an extensive technology component, allowing teachers to present content visually as well as verbally. Science and social studies are taught through the NYC DOE Core Curriculum, FOSS and Glencoe Science and Social Studies. ELL students have equal access to all instructional materials, including core curriculum materials. Each classroom is also equipped with a fully stocked classroom library with a wide variety of reading materials designed to support the individual eeds of ELL students as they begin to acquire and develop their skills in English. ELLs also have access to a wide array of technological tools, including laptop computers and SmartBoards. Students use iPads to acccess instructional resources. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Native language support is delivered in a variety of ways. Our computer-based instructional programs, Learning A to Z, Mathletics, have built in support for a variety of native languages. We provide glossaries to our students in their native languages so that they can more easily develop their academic knowledge. Finally we translate when necessary or pair students with someone who speaks their language. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. All required services support and resources correspond to ELLs age and grade levels. Materials selected are age and grade appropriate. Students are serviced according to Part 154 Mandates, with no more than 2 contiguous grades grouped for instructional purposes. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? We do not share a building. 2018-19 CEP 72  16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). Newly enrolled ELLs are supported in several ways. We provide parents of ELLs with information about community resources available for both their children and themselves. We encourage parents to avail themselves of these resources. The school schedules orientation sessions each September for Pre-Kindergarten and Kindergarten students Our parent coordinator is instrumental in ensuring parents are informed of available resources. In addition, we have developed a bilingual (Spanish) lending library. Our school counselors ensure a smooth transition of ELLs to their new environment. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? Students are offered Spanish as a language elective. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? N/A Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? Professional development,for the ESL Teachers as well as all classroom teachers, continues to be a focus for the school. School leaders have developed a profession development plan for the ESL teachers that include extensive PD on the school's Literacy programs, ReadyGen and Expeditionary Learning. Staff members have also completed QTEL Professional Development, including Building the Base and Building the Base 2, and regularly implements its theories at the school. We will seek out Professional Development opportunities offered through OELL that focus on supporting ELLs with Common Core Learning Standards. ALL staff members (common branch teachers, subject area teachers, paraprofessionals, guidance, special education teachers, psychologist, occupational therapist, physical therapist, speech teachers, secretaries and the parent coordinator) regularly participate in ELL training throughout the school year. Training opportuities include weekly academy meetings Election Day and Brooklyn Day. Topics will include Scaffolding for ELLs, Sheltered Instruction, Assessment for ELLs, and Math For ALL 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. We provide professional development to all teachers and administrators that specifically addresses the needs of English language learners. A minimum of fifteen percent (15%) of the required professional development hours for all teachers prescribed by CR Part 154 is dedicated to language acquisition, including a focus on best practices for co-teaching strategies and integrating language and content instruction for English language learners. For all English as a new language teachers, a minimum of fifty percent (50%) of the required professional development hours are dedicated to language acquisition in alignment with core content area instruction, including a focus on best practices for co-teaching strategies and integrating language and content instruction for English language learners. 2018-19 CEP 73  Teachers engage in Professional Development every Monday throughout the school year. Professional Development is aligned to the instructional vision of the school, determined by the Instructional Team each year after an extensive data analysis. The ENL Coordinator is a member of the instructional team and helps design PD that ensures teachers are participating in activities designed to improve ELL instruction at the school. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? We individually meet with the parents or guardians of English language learners at least once a year, in addition to parent-teacher conferences, initial parent orientations, quarterly progress meetings or other scheduled meetings provided for parents or guardians, to discuss the goals of the program, their child’s language development progress, their child’s English language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas. This additional meeting includes school staff necessary to sufficiently inform the parents or guardians about the child’s language development in all content areas in English. Such meeting is conducted with a qualified interpreter/translator in the language or mode of communication the parent or guardian best understands. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Parent involvement is an essential part of our school. Historically, parents of ELLs tend to be less involved in their children’s education. In an effort to strengthen parent involvement for our ELLs and facilitate increased interactions between school and home for these students, we offer a series of supportive and informative workshops. These workshops are planned based on the needs of parents and are designed to assist parents and enable them to be effective partners at home. We distribute interest surveys at the start of each school year and use that information to plan activities. We have translators for high incidence languages at all of our PTA meetings, as well as other important parent meetings. We have also set up a Lending Library, with materials in various languages, to serve as a resource for parents.We make use of the Translation Unit for translation services as well. In addition, several staff members assist in translating for parents - Ms. Chan (Chinese), Mr. Soto (Spanish), Ms. Chowdhury (Bengali and Urdu), Ms. Giugliano (Italian). Specific activities that foster ELL parent involvement include Science Saturdays Columbus Parade Multicultural Night Family Fun Nights Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. None 2018-19 CEP 74  2018-19 CEP 75 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Anthony Mungioli, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 CEP 76  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: PS 121 Nelson A Rockefeller School DBN: 21K121 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Anthony Mungioli Title Principal Lisa Giuliano Assistant Principal Loretta Bravata Parent Coordinator Lucille Randazzo ENL/Bilingual Teacher Christine Schneider Parent Mei Chan Teacher/Subject Area Leonarda Huertas Teacher/Subject Area Carolyn Cottrell Coach Coach Kelly Femiano School Counselor Isabel DiMola Nelly Cortes Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 2018-19 CEP 77  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 21K121 School Name: Nelson Rockefeller Superintendent: Isabel DiMola The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Loretta Bravata Parent Coordinator Yes Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. The Parent Coordinator and the ESL Coordinator work together with the Pupil Accounting Secretary to determine the languages represented at our school. We look at a variety of ATS reports, including HLIS, a report that indicates the OTELE codes of children in the school. We also look at the preferred communication languages parents indicated on the Blue Emergency cards (and subsequently entered into ATS) by running the RCPL report in ATS 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. 2018-19 CEP 78  Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral ARABIC BENGALI CHINESE ANY CANTONESE MANDARIN ENGLISH POLISH RUSSIAN SPANISH TADZHIK URDU UKRAINIAN UZBEK 11 12 47 0 0 309 4 14 153 2 16 6 17 1.86 2.03 7.95 0 0 52.28 0.68 2.37 25.89 0.34 2.71 1.02 2.88 11 12 38 7 4 306 4 13 153 3 17 6 17 1.86 2.03 6.43 1.18 0.68 51.78 0.68 2.2 25.89 0.51 2.88 1.02 2.88 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. Chinese, Spanish Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to Families Monthly Newsletters Monthly Monthly Calendar PTA Meeting Notices monthly monthly How do you plan to translate? Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. Staff, Translation Unit, Online translation services Staff,Translation Unit, Online translation services Staff, Translation Unit, Online translation services 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. 2018-19 CEP 79  Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide Parent teacher Conferences September, November, December, March Science Saturdays 4 times a Year Multicultural Night Fall interpretation service(s)? Staff members, Translation Services through the Big Word Staff members, Translation Services through the Big Word Staff members, Translation Services through the Big Word 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. We use School Messenger to communicate orally to parents. SM is an automated telephone system capable of translating messages into high Incidence Languages. In addition, We also utilize e-mail, sending E-Blasts as needed. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. A-663 is discussed during a faculty conference in September. Teachers are advised of the resources available to them, including a list of staff members able to translate. Teachers are also provided with the telephone number of the Language Line so that they can call as needed. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) We will fulfill Section VII of Chancellor’s Regulations A-663 in the following ways: •At the beginning of each school year and as part of the admission process for new arrivals, the school will determine the oral and written language preferences for the parent or guardian of each student in the school and determine the language needs of the school population. 2018-19 CEP 80  •The school will provide the parent of each student in the school written notification of their rights regarding translation and interpretation services, and instructions on how to obtain those services. This notices is available in 9 covered languages and is provided by the Department of Education. •The school will post in a conspicuous location near the primary entrance a sign in each of the covered languages indicating where a copy of the written notification can be obtained •The school safety plan will contain procedures for ensuring that parents in need of language assistance are not prevented from reaching the school’s administrative offices solely due to language barriers •Parents will be notified of the Department’s website where information in each covered language concerning the rights of parents to translation and interpretation services and how to access such services Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? The school will develop a parent survey to determine of the needs of the parents are being met. The survey will be disributed twice a year, with adjustments to services being made as needed. 2018-19 CEP 81 
