2018-19 COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (CEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 32K123 School Name: P.S. 123 SUYDAM Principal: ARELIS PARACHE 2018-19 CEP 1  Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 CEP 2  School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information PS 123 K Suydam Escuela Magnet para el vapor 33320010123 Pre-K -5 School Number (DBN): 32K123 100 Irving Avenue Brooklyn, Nueva York 11237 718-821-4810 Phone Number: 718-821-0858 Fax: Arelis Parache aparach@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Geographical District: 32 Email Address: Arelis Parache Denise Dirlik Jazzy Rivera Arelis Parache Jazzy Rivera n / A n / A District Information Sheila Gorski Superintendent: 797 Bushwick Avenue Brooklyn, Nueva York 11221 Superintendent’s Office Address: sgorski@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718-574-1203 Phone Number: 718-574-1245 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) 2018-19 CEP 3  Brooklyn Norte Bernadette Fitzgerald FSC: Executive Director: 131 Livingston Street Habitación 501 Brooklyn NY 11201 Executive Director’s Office Address: BFitzge2@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 718-225-5119 Phone Number: 718-935-4314 Fax: 2018-19 CEP 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Arelis Parache Denise Dirlik Jazzy Rivera SaraiGarcia Veronica Garcia *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/ Member/ Parent Member/ Parent 2018-19 CEP 5  Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Jacqueline Giraud Yecenia Samayoa Paula Ineztroza Cynthia Kennedy Robert Pena Diaz Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Teacher Member/ Teacher Member/ Teacher Member/Teacher Member/Parent Member/ Member/ 2018-19 CEP 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with 2018-19 CEP 7  the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement 2018-19 CEP 8  Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 1. What is your school’s mission statement? School’s Mission Statement Section 4: CEP Overview PS123 is a school centered around the belief that all students are capable of learning at very high levels when given the necessary time and resources to do so. Pre-kindergarten through fifth grade children will use the arts- literary, visual, and performing- as a prism for learning about the world around them while simultaneously immersed in a rigorous, well-rounded education utilizing a problem based and project based learning approach that delivers an 2018-19 CEP 9  innovative hands-on curriculum integrating all disciplines of STEAM (Science, Technology, Engineering, Art and Mathematics) with real-world applications. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. Unique Characteristics of PS 123 PS 123 is a pre-kindergarten – 5th grade elementary school located in the Bushwick community of Brooklyn. This school overlooks the beautiful Maria Hernandez Park with ready access to a number of art galleries within walking distance. In October 2017, the school was awarded a Federal Magnet for STEAM (Science, Technology, Engineering, Art and Mathematics) making PS 123K the only magnet school in District 32. All students receive magnet theme instruction through STEAM (Science, Technology, Engineering, Art, Mathematics) integration and established partnerships. Public School 123, The Suydam Magnet School for STEAM, is a learning community that is dedicated to fostering ethical, caring, self-reflective and critical thinkers with a life-long love for learning. The student to teacher relationship is at the core of our community. PS 123 celebrates the diversity of all its members, supports their different learning styles, encourages them to express their individuality and pursue their interests. PS 123 is a place for children and adults to discover and feel confident about who they are, build healthy relationships with adults and peers, and investigate their questions about the world in a safe, nurturing and academically rigorous environment. This community aims to cultivate a love of learning in all of its members. Community Collaboration and Partnerships PS 123 has developed important partnerships that support our magnet theme (STEAM). Our Science lab is being supported by NY Sun Works in its hydroponics transformation; from installation, a rigorous curriculum to providing our teachers with hands on professional development. LeAp (Learning through Expanded Arts) provides our students with hands-on, activity based STEAM instruction (Engineering, Lego robotics and Hands-on Science). There is a strong arts component with opportunities for music at PS 123 (Music and the Brain curriculum), chorus, guitar, keyboard, recorder, and visual art. Turtle Bay Music School, provides violin and Brazilian Percussion and Dance instruction culminating in a recital. Having a long-term partnership with Studio in a School, professional artists have a yearlong residency at the school and offer quality art sessions where children explore their creativity and learn the joys and benefits of making art. Studio in a School’s Art Club students create their own art exhibition displayed at the Asia Society in Manhattan. Saturday Family Art workshops at the school exposes families to local art galleries in Bushwick, and creating works of art at our in-house studio. Our long-term partnership with the Coalition for Hispanic Family Services has afforded the students of PS 123 Arts and Literacy Program during the school year and summer months. The Arts and Literacy After School and Summer Program addresses the educational needs of Bushwick children by providing them with opportunities to create, think, communicate, and problem solve. Program activities build literacy in the widest sense of the word through creative writing, the visual arts, theater, photography, video, creative movement, music, martial arts, media literacy, gardening, and yoga. The interdisciplinary curriculum builds upon the children's interests and strengths, using the 2018-19 CEP 10  same effective, holistic, multicultural approach which is the hallmark of all of the Coalition's programs. The program also offers art therapy, monthly Family Arts Nights with family literacy workshops, support for families, family educational trips, apprenticeships for neighborhood high school students, and comprehensive services through the agency's other programs. PS 123 (Kids Care Club) participates in Penny Harvest and partnered with the Department of Veteran Affairs New York Harbor Health Care to help our student’s experience service. They also make donations to Family Care Day by donating canned and non-perishable food to the community at large. In addition, through collaboration with Cool Culture, our families and students enjoy 90 of NYC's world-class cultural institutions for free, all with experiences that improve literacy and learning. Additionally, our partnership with USTA (United States Tennis Association) resulted in a student Tennis Club that attends various tennis clinics at the Billy Jean King National Tennis Center. To promote physical fitness, our partnership with Punk Rope, provides professional development for students and teachers in various jump rope techniques, provides free jump ropes for students to implement various jump rope contests that motivates physical activity in our students and staff. Our partnership with BOKS (Building Our Kids’ Success) provides free fitness-based activities for students before the start of the school day twice a week. This program provides a physical education instructor who engages students in non-competitive games and teaches them the benefits of good nutrition, in alignment with the school’s goal to increase health awareness. Special Initiatives Implemented PS 123 has a Wellness Committee founded by teachers and students who come together to discuss ways of promoting healthier lifestyles. Our School Wellness Council had a healthy and successful year! We were honored for promoting wellness, receiving the 2016-2017 NYC Excellence in Wellness Bronze Award. Through our partnership with Cornell University, our Health Squad students learned about the benefits of daily exercise, how to read food labels, and choose “just right” portions. The Health Squad led and succeeded in their efforts to end chocolate milk in school. Our school is proud to be a "No Chocolate Milk" school. The Wellness Council and Health Squad hosted the school’s first annual Wellness Expo where community partners (USTA, FDNY, NYPD, Punk Rope, Cornell University, Studio in a School, Smile Dental, NYC Health and Mental Hygiene, NY Bike Safety, Modern MD), came together to educate families in our community about various types of wellness and enjoy some great physical activity. Parent volunteers participated in fund-raising by selling a student created Bilingual Wellness Recipe Cookbook, fruit smoothies, and healthy snacks. Our work with the S.T.E.A.M. Team has instilled confidence in students to motivated them to explore the engineering design process, and taught them perseverance, critical thinking and teamwork. PS 123 also collaborates with various CUNY Colleges such as Brooklyn College, City College, and Hunter College and welcomes student teachers who want to pursue teaching as their career. We afford student teachers the opportunity of having meaningful fieldwork experiences as they support the classroom teacher and work with our scholars in either small groups or as a class in general. To support our magnet theme, STEAM, through project based learning, our partnership with the Buck Institute provides ongoing professional development for teachers where they learn to develop PBL STEAM units that are, rigorous, aligned to Common Core Learning Standards, as well as the Social Studies and Science Scope and Sequence, Next Generation Science Standards, and provide our students with real-world applications. 2018-19 CEP 11  As we look forward to next year, we are looking to increase participation in environmental science (garden and hydroponics lab), promote sustainability (composting, recycling & energy conservation) in our school community, and to continue to provide STEAM education workshops for our parents. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. Currently the student with disability population at PS 123 is 15% and the English Language Learner Population is 33%. According to the 2018 Math State data, 22% of our ENL's are approaching grade level . Based on our 2018 ELA data, 41% of SWD's are approaching standards. We will continue to support our ELLs and SWDs through various scaffolding techniques so that the students can accomplish tasks they could otherwise not complete without assistance. Some examples of scaffolds that took place at PS123K this year are modified text, graphic organizers, sentence frames and stems, modified and alternate texts, visuals and realia, note taking, listening guides, internet, and Video Observations such as (ReCAP) recap. Recap is a free teacher app that allows teachers see how students learn best by explaining their thinking on video. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. Strengths , and Accomplishments Growths Made:  Based on an in-depth analysis of the NYSED 2018 data files, there was an increase in the overall median adjusted growth percentile for the Math state exam. There was a 4% increase in the students proficiency levels. In addition, there was an 11% increase in the students proficiency levels  PS 123K continues to have excellent metric values on all components of the framework, but in particular has shown a significant growth in the area of strong family -community-ties as noted in the 2017-2108 School Quality Guide. Our key area of focus will be to continue to work on Rigorous Instruction.  Parent meetings, workshops, the school messenger system, and individual progress reports inform parents of their children’s achievement and performance in school. The school ensures alignment of curricula to Common Core Learning Standards and offers meaningful learning experiences that promote rigor to improve student learning.  The school’s PPT (Pupil Personnel Team) includes the guidance counselor, social worker, psychologists, family worker, IEP teacher and Parent Coordinator. The team works collaboratively to ensure that students receive the necessary guidance that fully supports them in attaining positive academic and personal behaviors. For example, the guidance counselor and social worker promotes the school’s core values during grade-level classroom inter-visitations. During this time, students participate in activities that reinforce monthly themes and learn about tolerance, friendship, and respect, thereby developing their social emotional skills and contributing to their academic success. Therefore, there are minimal disruptions throughout the school day as reflected in a negligible number of superintendent suspensions. The attendance committee closely monitors data for chronically absent students and follows up with phone calls, letters to families, and individual meetings with parents to stress the importance of daily attendance. Students with exemplary attendance receive monthly incentives such as certificates. 2018-19 CEP 12   PS 123 also celebrates a 94% daily school-wide attendance and Monthly family celebrations for families to participate, teach and reinforce instructional strategies they can use to help support their children at home.  The school is in the beginning phases of implementing Project Based Learning through the Buck Institute utilizing the adopted Common Core aligned English Language Arts (ELA) and Math programs from Engageny to ensure coherence of standards-based curricula and attention to the instructional shifts across grades. The content-focused ELA programs infuse science and social studies through the reading of complex texts across grade levels and content areas. For example, common planning sessions engage teachers in adjusting the pacing of instructional units, identifying appropriate scaffolds and varied visuals to provide access to lessons for all students. In the early childhood grades, teachers plan to ensure that academic tasks address appropriate Depth Of Knowledge (DOK) levels and that lessons incorporate letter recognition, word work, fluency, and academic vocabulary. Across the school, teachers plan writing units to increase the alignment of the reading program to the Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS). As a result, students participate in rich, coherent curriculum that promotes college and career readiness skills as noted in performance-based tasks, including literary essays and argumentative writing that reflect rigor and student thinking.  E.S.L. Program for our Parents - The ESL Program is offered, 5 days a week from 8:30 - 11:30 AM to our parents. This program provides support and instruction in the English language, American culture, and academic and cognitive areas which will enable them to become successful partners in our schools, the community, and most importantly in their children's education.  Area of focus is for students take ownership of their learning and to have student led conferences to further accelerate their learning 2018-19 CEP 13  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 32K123 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 0K,01,02,03,04,05 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 627 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language YES Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 37 37 29 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 53 46 29 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 97.0% % Attendance Rate 93.1% % Reduced Lunch 38.6% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.8% 88.8% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 1.9% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 4.08 0% 8% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 29.1% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 96% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A NO N/A NO NO Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A YSH N/A NO YSH Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A YES N/A N/A YES High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 65 61 94.1% 2.2% 17.1% 2.7% 5.4% 1.1% 0 12% 8.3 32.3% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No N/A N/A N/A YSH NO N/A N/A N/A YES YSH N/A N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 CEP 14  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 1 . A comprehensive assessment of our academic program was completed using the information from the School Quality Report Data, school-based assessment data, and MoTP data. As a school, we are meeting the target in student achievement on both the ELA and the math state exams and approaching target in student progress. When the MoTP was analyzed, it was found that for 2017-2018 school year 84% of teachers on Staff were rated effective on Domain 3 Instruction: Component 3B: Using Questioning and Discussion Techniques based on Advance Ratings. Needs: Although our strength clearly lies in our dedicated and effective faculty, we would like to work on improving our teacher practice to increase student achievement, especially for the lowest-third students, within the school since we did not meet the target in closing the achievement gap with students in special populations. Our goal will be to recognize and celebrate our teachers’ expertise while constantly striving to professionally grow. According to the NYS 2016-2017 School Report Card 18% of all students scored at or above proficiency levels 3 and 4 on the NYS ELA exam. While this represents an increase in proficiency levels, 46% of all students scored at level 1. Our priority need is the English Language Learners subgroup where 73% scored at level 1 on the NYS ELA assessement. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, all teachers instructing English Language Learners will implement targeted instructional strategies that will result in a 2 % increase of scoring at or above proficiency (Level 3 & 4) as measured by the NYS ELA Assessment 2018-19 CEP 15  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs,  professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). ● Through the Wonders/Maravillas literacy program, language and content objectives for our ELLs will be addressed through multiple entry points in every lesson. Teacher September-June 2019 Administration  Each observation will include actionable and meaningful feedback for the teachers to make improvements in their teaching and enhance ELLs Language acquisition. ● Teachers will attend PD on Wonders/Maravillas literacy program facilitated by Mc Graw Hill consultants, as well as Dual Language teachers. and as well Increasing Academic Discourse Strategies facilitated by the staff, network, and other organizations to support the needs of students with disabilities and ELLs ● Teachers will receive support from their colleagues – inter-visitation to view best practices and embedding HOTS questioning and DOK Level 3 and 4 into a lesson. n/a 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Teachers, Paraprofessionals September-June 2019 Administration How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Beginning September 2018 - June 2019, workshops will be provided to inform families how to engage student learning and promote student academic discourse at home to inquire about topics that are of interest to them an assist in framing questions that will promote their thinking in a deep cognitive level. All parents will have access to our school website where they can view links to math activities, including a differentiated math website based on their child’s performance. Families will have access to the District Family 2018-19 CEP 16  Learning Suite which is housed at PS123K to receive further resources and supports to build a home-school connection. Monthly family celebrations will be held for families to see what students are learning and how they are engaged in curriculum. ● BiMonthly Coffee with the Principal ● Monthly PTA meetings  Monthly Parent STEAM Workshops E.S.L. Program for our Parents - The ESL Program Provided by Adult Education is offered, 5 days a week from 8:30am - 11:30 a.m. our parents to provide support and instruction in the English language, American culture, and academic and cognitive areas. This will enable them to become successful partners in our schools, the community, and most important in their children's education. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. ● Administrative Team will design the 2018-2019 Advance Annual Observation Calendar for Observation Options ● Administrative Team will develop an Annual School-wide Professional Development Plan to differentiate PD to support teachers’ individual professional goals. ● Weekly Monday Professional Development Days ● Per Diem /Substitute Teachers for PD at Borough Field Support and other organizations. Parent Calendar Days for Workshops Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, we will evaluate if 30% of the teacher observations as noted in the Advance Teacher's Rating Report, have been rated effective in domain 1: Planning and Preparing: by using language and content objectives to support ELLs as measured and observed in teacher's pedagogy. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) As measured and observed in teacher's pedagogy through the Danielson Framework. 2018-19 CEP 17  Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 18  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? After examining the 2017-2018 Quality Review the school was well developed in Quality Review Indicator 3.4: consistently communicate high expectations,ensuring training is provided for all staff, and effectively collaborate with families to support their child's progress ,however, the school needs to improve upon: consistently planning for the highest-achieving students to further accelerate their learning, it was determined that priority to support teachers in this area of focus will include ● Professional Development for teachers in analyzing formative assessments to provide clear next steps for students to address learning needs ● Use of protocol to analyze student assessment practices ● Class inter-visitations to see how meaningful feedback is given to students on their work products Professional Learning opportunities for data input and analysis In addition, according to the data analysis of teacher evaluations in Advance, 88% of all teachers scored Effective in Advance on Danielson’s component 1e Designing Coherent Instruction. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, there will be a 10% increase of teachers from 78% to 88%, favorably responding to questions regarding "Classroom Behavior" in the category of "Supportive Environment" from the NYC Learning Environment Survey. 2018-19 CEP 19  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? ● Teachers will use a ladder of referral to target student behavior and reinforcements of the value of the month Teachers September 2018- June 2019 Administration, School Counselor  Teachers will utilize the PRIM book Pre-Referral Intervention Manual to address various behavioral problems that may arise in the classroom .  Teachers will analyze student writing focusing on the value of the month and implementation with student behavior  Professional development on student behavior and value of the month Utilize the EDAT tool to monitor ELL academic and progress and attendance ENL's SWDs will be targeted with behavior monitoring system and implementation of IEP goal alignment SWD's Creation of Value of the Month Bulletin Board to promote good character and respect for all. Students September-2018 -June 2019 Administration, Teachers, ENL Coordinator September 2018- June 2019 Teachers, Paraprofessionals, Related Service Providers September 2018 -June 2019 Teachers Paraprofessionals, Guidance Counselor 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. From September 2018- June 2019, There will be a value of the month professional development for families. Pre-K and Kindergarten parents will be invited to participate in Cool Culture, a program that will give them access to hundreds of cultural institutions in New York City at no cost  Parents will be invited to Meet the Teacher Night , Open School Week in November, monthly Family Center Workshops, and Reading Workshops hosted by our staff 2018-19 CEP 20   Parents will receive Quarterly Student Progress Reports and updates on their child’s performance during Tuesday’s Parent Engagement Session. Monthly Coffee with Principal  Work collaboratively with parents by hosting information sessions about curriculum and NYS Testing and inviting parents to Literacy, Math, Art, and Science evening curriculum nights.  The monthly "Coffee with the Principal" designed so that that both the principal and parents sit to discuss topics related to organizing school events, upcoming events, volunteerism, school and community goals, and building positive family relationships. The meeting is geared to building a partnership between the school and all families for the purpose of working together to create a community of learners and thinkers. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. ● Principal and Assistant Principals will conduct IPC (Initial Planning Conferences), classroom observations, and provide feedback, using the framework to develop next steps. ● Principal and Assistant Principals will hold professional development sessions related to components of the Danielson Framework. Principal and Assistant Principals conduct observations and provide feedback. Teachers will curriculum plan for after school programs. Teachers will facilitate parent workshops. Per Session for after school workshops for parents Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, there will be a decrease in the level of incidents in OORS in comparison to the 2017-2018 data for this time frame. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. OORS, Student Functional Behavior Plan, Teacher anecdotals, BIP (Behavior Intervention Plan) Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 21  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Strengths:  Rated well developed in Teacher Teams Ares (4.2) noted in January 2018 Quality Review Needs: According to our 2018 Teacher Survey, teachers the data indicated the need for an increase in professional development to addressing the need Project Based Learning curriculum mapping and the writing of the magnet units of study. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 100% of the teaching staff will engage in professional development opportunities designed to improve both teacher practice and curriculum planning to meet the needs of all learners including English Language Learners and Students with Disabilities, as by student work products that promote higher level thinking as measured by the Rigor Relevance Framework.. 2018-19 CEP 22  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). ● Teachers will participate in ELA and Math professional development to strengthen their understanding of the Common Core Learning Standards. Emphasis will be the development of writing skills in English Language Learners. On/off site professional development provided by Magnet Resource Specialists, Buck Institute and Brooklyn North Network. ● ICT Teachers will participate in Professional Development on how to meet the needs of Students with Disabilities in their class from the BFSC. ● Teachers will also meet on a weekly basis during grade level common planning and grade level Teacher Teams working to develop different checklists, rubrics and assessments that will be used to check for understanding. ● Given this collaboration amongst teachers, teacher will input their data onto a newly created technology platform. This platform will give access to other /future teachers as to student performance in current/ previous academic school year. ● Teachers will work in teacher teams during Monday and/or Tuesday Professional Development sessions and during common planning time to analyze student work and modify instruction to ensure that students are meeting the standards for all learners including ELLs and Students with Disabilities. Teachers on each grade will begin to use protocols to look at student work, in order to deepen conversations around trends, so that best practices can be identified and implemented. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Teachers September-June 2019 Teachers, Administration, Coach, Magnet Resource Specialists Teachers September -June 2019 Administration, Teachers Teachers September-June 2019 Administration, Teachers Teachers will receive support from their colleagues – inter-visitation to view best practices. Teachers September- June 2019 Teachers, Administration, Coordinators 3b – Parent and Family Engagement 2018-19 CEP 23  How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. From September 2018 - June 2019, E.S.L. Program for our Parents - The ESL program is offered, 3 days a week from 8:30 a.m. - 11:30 a.m. to our parents to provide support and instruction in the English language, American culture, and the academic and cognitive areas that will allow them to become partners. successfully in our schools, the community and, most importantly in the education of their children Bi-monthly coffee with the principal. Work collaboratively with parents by hosting information sessions about curriculum and New York State Testing and inviting parents to Literacy, Mathematics, Art, Science and night curriculum nights, Workshops STEAM Curriculum Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc.  Teachers will meet after school to analyze lesson plans to add the needs of their learners including SPEDs and ELLs , twice a month.  Teachers will utilize weekly common planning periods to analyze student work and modify instruction to ensure that students are meeting the standards .  Teachers will attend writing curriculum planning provided by the Buck Institute and Magnet Resource Specialists. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA X Title II, Part A SIG PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019 teachers will complete their third cycle of inquiry, and have set goals, developed action plans, and implemented pedagogical practices leading to enhanced student achievement as measured by classroom observations of teacher practice on Advance. We will evaluate whether 10% growth was made towards proficiency of student work products as measured by Rigor Relevance Framework. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Teacher Fountas - Pinnell Data Reference Sheets, conference notes, pre-check lists and post evaluation data, in the writing of demand, and math assessments. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 24  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Strengths: According to the results of the 2017-2018 Framework for Great Schools Report, 94 %of the teachers feel that there is consistency in curriculum, instruction, and learning materials in the same grade level and 93% of teachers believe that the principal sets clear expectations for teachers about implementing what they have learned in professional development. We will continue to provide continue to increase opportunities for teachers to share and learn from one another. The goal will be to give school leaders an opportunity for input and participation in professional learning. In order to do this we will ● Develop a yearly Professional Learning Calendar which will include school/teacher leaders sharing best practices with the faculty. Needs:  Teachers turnkey professional development in guided reading as measured by administrator observation in the classroom, and student benchmark assessment data.  According to the NYS 2017-2018 School Report Card 29% of all students scored at or above proficiency levels 3 and 4 on the NYS ELA exam. While this represents an increase in proficiency levels, 32% of all students scored at level 1.  Our priority need is the English Language Learners subgroup where 39% scored at level 1 on the NYS ELA assessement. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. 2018-19 CEP 25  By June 2019, there will be a 25% increase in the number of teachers who will share in distributive leadership roles leading the professional learning in guided reading as evidenced by yearly Professional Learning plan and sign-in sheets of teacher team members. 2018-19 CEP 26  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Teachers will facilitate Professional Development in all content areas including Speech and Language Services to strengthen their understanding of colleagues understanding of guided reading. Teachers October-June 2019 Administration, Related Service Providers Teachers will have a teacher team LAB site on every grade to provide classroom inter-visitation Teachers will utilize Students Students September –June 2019 Administration, teachers September-June 2019 Administration, teachers  Wonder/Maravillas literacy program's Guided Reading  Resources for guided reading Scholastic News Across Content areas will be utilized to support literacy Targeted action plan for ELLs and SWDs will be utilized to monitor student progress in literacy. Students October-June 2019 AP supervisor, teachers, ENL coordinator Parents will be notified via the school’s website, letters and the monthly calendar of all events and workshops in order to strengthen the home-school connection within the curriculum . 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. From September 2018 - June 2019:  Teachers will conduct parent workshops which will provide parents with an overview of curriculum, and the Citywide Instructional Expectations (all grades).  Parent School-wide Monthly Newsletters Grades PreK-5  Monthly Parent Reading Connection Newsletter  Parent Coordinator workshops 2018-19 CEP 27   Science, Math, ELA, NYSESLAT, and Home Connection Workshops Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. School Website and Wellness Committee Members Activities will be designed and reinforced through the use of resources from GoMath, Math Exemplars Curriculum and teacher generated resources. Per Session After School Workshops Parents will be notified via the school’s website, letters and the monthly calendar of all events and workshops in order to strengthen the home-school connection within the curriculum . Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG X X Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, there will be a 10% increase of faculty taking part in the Professional Learning plan as evidence in observations of PD facilitated, agenda, and sign-in sheets. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Teacher Professional Learning Agendas, Sign in Attendance and Danielson Framework 4e Growing Professionally. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 28  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Strengths:  As per the 2017-2018 Learning Environment Survey 98% of families say that school staff regularly communicate with them about how families can help children learn and 98% of the families also say that teachers work closely with them to meet their child's needs.  2017- 2018, Berry Blast Festival, Family Game Night, STEAM Family Curriculum Night, Wellness Expo Needs:  As a school family, we want to continue to utilize community-based organizations (Studio in a School and the Hispanic Coalition) to strive to provide additional parental/student support. In order to do so we will continue to enlist other agencies through grant opportunities to partner with us.  According to 2017-2018 attendance/sign-in sheets from parent workshops and school events, there is a need to increase the number of parents attending Tuesday Parent Engagement workshops.  We want to empower parents by providing them with opportunities to transfer what they've learned during parent workshops with their child at home. Parents will bring artifacts and/or share pictures showcasing the implementation of what was learned. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June, 2019, there will be a 15% increase in the number of parent school-wide who participate in Tuesday afternoon Parent Engagement Workshops. This will be evidenced in sign-in sheets, pictures and video clips. 2018-19 CEP 29  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? The Parent Coordinator, PTA, teachers, Partnering Organizations such as Studio in a School and Hispanic Coalition will maintain open, ongoing communication with parents, sending newsletters, notes and personal invitations to encourage parents to attend workshops and other parent involvement activities. There will be student led conferences for parents where all students will facilitate the discussion that reflects their learning in the classroom. Parents October-June 2019 Teachers. Parent Coordinator, PTA, Hispanic Coalition Director and Studio in a School Director Parents September- June 2019 Administration, Teachers, Students Quarterly Academic Progress Reports sent home to families Parents September- June 2019 Monthly School Calendar Invitation to families Monthly Classroom celebrations Project Praise School-wide Initiative Administration, Teachers, Partnering Organizations, Parent Coordinator, PTA, Hispanic Coalition Director, Studio in a School Director Family Night With Hispanic Coalition and Studio in Schools Host Annual Scholastic Book Fair Families are invited to work collaboratively with teachers, Partnering Organizations on culminating projects and Family Nights in all content areas Parents September-June 2019 Teachers, Partnering Organizations, Parent Coordinator, PTA Myon, BrainPop, Discovery Education, and other educational web-based programs that families can access from home or the library to support student learning. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. Hispanic Coalition, USTA, Turtle Bay Music School, LeAp, Carnegie Hall, Creative Arts, Cornell University, NY Sunworks, NY Hall of Science, Makerbot 2018-19 CEP 30  Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Licensing and registration for each student enrolled at PS123 for I-Ready and Discovery Education, Mathletics, MyOn, MosaMack, and other partnering organization facilitators, and per session funds Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG X X Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, there will be a 5% increase in parents showcasing the transference of learning from school to home. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Catalog of family artifacts, pictures, and testimonials from STEAM and Literacy Parent Workshops. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 31  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) A leveled literacy intervention programand Great Leaps are being used. small group instruction in class When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) These services are provided during the school day during Fountas and Pinnell LLI small group instruction provided by Literacy AIS Teachersand Great Leaps are 1:1 programs. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Based on 2018ELA State Data: 86 of students out of 296 who tested are not on proficiency level of 3 or 4 29% met the standards for ELA Mathematics Based on 2018 Math State Data: 98 students out of 303 who tested are not on proficiency level of 3 or 4= These programs focuson word work, comprehension and uses the students’ instructional levels, or zone of proximal development as the starting point. Go Math AIS using baseline, midline and end line Periodic Assessment data to inform customized teaching interventions small group pullout instruction These services are provided during the school during Math AIS pull out provided by Math Coach 32% met the standards of State Math Test Science Student work products and observations Amplify Science MOsaMack, NYSun Works curriculum is being used to impact reading and small group instruction, one- to -one conferring These services are provided during the school day 2018-19 CEP 32  Social Studies Student work products Observations At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Behavior Plans At Risk Behavior Anecdotes and observations from teacher with classroom interventions attempted/mastered and not mastered . literacy comprehension. ( It is also expected to impact student comprehension for Science.) Leveled Science books The Literacy Wonders Curriculumand Passport to Social Studies is being used to impact reading and literacy comprehension. ( It is also expected to impact student comprehension for Social Studies.) Leveled Social Studies books Peer Mediation Anti-Bullying Workshops: Intervention will be provided to students focusing on social and emotional coping skills, feelings, character education, and career awareness. 1)Differentiated materials These services are provided during the school day 2) Small group instruction 3) One to one conferring Small groups These services are provided during the school day 2018-19 CEP 33  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 19 students which equates to 3% of our population are Students in Temporary Housing. 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. Students will continue to receive AIS and Afterschool Programs to support their learning through various STEAM programs, ENL programs which include theater and the arts. STH population receives backpacks, school supplies, and uniforms as well as seasonal attire as needed (ie: coats, hats, scarves, gloves, etc.). Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 CEP 34  N/A 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. N/A 2018-19 CEP 35  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. Our entire staff is licensed and working within their appropriate license areas. We have a staff that is 100% highly qualified as defined by New York State. A majority of our teachers are ESL and/or certified with Bilingual Extension licenses in addition to their Common Branch Licenses . ESL and Dual Language will continue to receive support from Borough Field Support, Dual Language Consultant, and UFT Professional Development to ensure the staff is highly qualified. We provide opportunities to college student teachers from Brooklyn, BMCC, Boricua, Touro, Hunter, and City Colleges. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). The following are the strategies and activities used for recruitment, retention, assignments and support including High Quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. ● All teachers are given professional development (PD) weekly, as well as on professional development days dedicated to staff development. ● Positions are posted on the online Department of Education web site where candidates can apply. ● Student teachers from Hunter, Brooklyn, and City College work at PS 123 and are developed and mentored by a master teacher. ● All new teachers are mentored by an experienced and well-developed teacher. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. 2018-19 CEP 36  n/a 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). n/a Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). PS 123 currently has two preschool classes. Our school has a pre-orientation which introduces the students and families to the administration, teachers, parents, paras, the parent coordinator, PTA, classrooms and other areas of the school building. Workshops explain the kindergarten goals and objectives for students and how the goals will provide parents with the social and academic expectations for the students. 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. At Inquiry Team meetings and staff meetings teachers discuss and make decisions on assessment(s) at the school level. This is done in order to customize assessments to teacher and student needs, for better data collection and articulation from grade- to- grade. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section 2018-19 CEP 37  Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Column B Section Reference(s) 5a Part 4b Title I Part A (Basic) Federal 531,420.00 Title II, Part A Federal Title III, Part A Federal Title III, Immigrant Federal 113,924.00 30,286.00 000.00 Tax Levy (FSF) Local 3,659,683.00 X x X X 5b Part 4b 5C Part 4b 5D Part 4b 5E Part 4b 5C Part 4b 5D Part 4b 5E Part 4b 5b Part 4b 5a Part 4b 5b Part 4b 5c Part 4b 5d Part 4b 5e part 4b 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from 2018-19 CEP 38  which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 CEP 39  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. PS123K, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. PS 123K will support parents and families of Title I students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; 2018-19 CEP 40  ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before October 30th of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in 2018-19 CEP 41  the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Every Student Succeeds Act; ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) School-Parent Compact (SPC) PS 123K , in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for 2018-19 CEP 42  improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to October 30th of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year. 2018-19 CEP 43  Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; 2018-19 CEP 44  ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, comment forms and notices when requested; ● involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and review of the Parental Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate or request for training offer from the school, the district and the Department of Education center / or state to learn more about learning strategies whenever possible and teaching; ● take part in the Parent Association or Parent Teacher Association of the school or serve as much as possible in the advisory groups, for example, the Title I Parent Committees, School or District leadership teams; ● share responsibility for improving my child's academic performance; III. Student Responsibilities Student Responsibilities: ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and present all homework on time; ● follow the rules of the school and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; 2018-19 CEP 45  ● always everything possible to learn. 2018-19 CEP 46 Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components: 1. 2. 3. The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers. Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. 1. 2. 3. 4. High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” 1. Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences. Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. 1. These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 3 9 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 5 11 12 2018-19 CEP 47  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the · · · · · · rationale subgroups and grade levels of students to be served schedule and duration language of instruction # and types of certified teachers types of materials Begin description here: Rationale: In order to support learning and foster community involvement, we use a portion of our Title III, funding to create supplementary programs for ELLs and their families. The direct instruction component: After School Program Subgroups and grade levels of students to be served: In Kindergarten there will be 3 teachers. One teacher will service 20 students at the entering and emerging levels. The second Kindergarten teacher will service 19 Emerging and transitioning level students. The third teacher will service 15 expanding and commanding students. In first and second grade the students will be serviced by proficiency level not grade level. One teacher will service 15 entering and emerging leveled students on grades one and two. The second teacher will service 20 transitioning students on grades one and two. The third teacher will service 20 expanding and commanding students on grades one and two. The 6 classrooms will have between 15-20 students, and will be instructed by a certified teacher in Bilingual and/or ENL. (15-20:1) Schedule and duration: 24 sessions. Twice a week. 2:30p.m.-4:00p.m. January 9, 2019 - April 3, 2019. (No sessions will be held on February 20th and 21st (Midwinter Recess) or March 14th (Parent-Teacher Conference).) Language of instruction: English. # and types of certified teachers: 6 ENL teachers Types of materials: Finishline NY ELLS Bilingual Common Core Program and Mathletics Instruction: Flexible groupings Description: We will instruct the ELL students academically, in English, in the areas of reading, writing, and math, . For the reading and writing curriculum we will be using "Finishline NY ELLS". This program will address all four modalities, reading, writing,listening and speaking; providing our students opportunities to use and implement structured support for speaking through sentence frames, interaction with texts on a range of topics representing a variety of genres and content areas. Also, regular opportunities to write about what they are learning using text evidence. The program uses themes that mirror the NYSESLAT approach which ties to a content area. the program targets the linguistic demands of grade level common core instruction. Items target the various performance levels and speaking questions built in difficulty. Passage types include informational and literary texts that align with the text complexity of the CCLS at grade level. For Math instruction we will use "Mathletics" which targets essential math skills aligned to NYS key focal points. All key skills and concepts are 2018-19 CEP 48  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information embedded in lesson topics that have been carefully sequenced so students move from basic skills to more complex content. The targeted population will be our ELL students; Newcomers, and ELLs with Special Needs in grades k-2. rationale teachers to receive training schedule and duration topics to be covered name of provider Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. · · · · · Begin description here: Rationale: The professional development program will highlight ENL strategies embedded in all content areas. All professional developments have a focus on the ENL learner to foster progress and language mastery. Teachers to receive training: All of our ENL and/or Bilingual certified teachers. Schedule and duration: Professional Development will take place from 2:25-3:40 on Dec. 17th, Jan. 28th, Feb. 25th, and March 18th. Record Maintenance: A binder will archive all agendas and attendance sheets reflecting PD activity. Name(s) of provider: PD sessions are conducted by the principal Arelis Parache, assistant principal Carmen Soto, ENL/Dual Language Coordinator Robert Pena Diaz, Dual Language team member Ms. Leemarys Morales and Raquel Estevez, and ENL Certified teachers Paula Inestroza and Daisy Lopez. The providers are highly-qualified and experienced in accommodating ELL students’ needs and fostering learning for progress. Expectations (Impact): It is expected that all staff internalize and put into practice skills and strategies learned at PD sessions. This will enable the staff member to enrich their craft and tailor their instruction to the needs of the individual student. In turn, student performance will improve. Topics to be covered: Topics for professional development are Planning Instruction that is Aligned to our ELLs Language Needs and Data, The Usage of Shared Reading and Writing Activities, Planning of Read Alouds with a Vocabulary Focus and Language Goals, and The Use of Finishline for the Development of Language Acquisition. 2018-19 CEP 49  Part C: Professional Development PROFESSIONAL DEVELOPMENT 2018/2019MATHEMATICS - Based on the results of the Spring’16 city/state mathematics test, teachers will delve in using strategies to assist students in a deeper understanding of explaining problems and solutions step-by-step, orally and written; raise the level of thinking; provide multiple ways to solving problems. Create and develop questions using the DOK model. Teachers will be knowledgeable about the variety of ways to instruct and show a solution any math problem.Teachers will receive further information on rubrics in mathematics to assess student work. Teachers will be able to modify and adjust lessons according to student work analysis.READING - Teachers will be provided with comprehension skills and strategies to incorporate in their lessons. Close reading will be the core of incorporating the reading skills that will guide students reading strengths and abilities. Students will learn how to chunk the text to determine importance, understand text structures, make text connections, synthesize information across various passages and texts to form an opinion, formulate questions to gain a deeper understanding of any given text, and look back at a text to analyze and construct unique meaning.DATA ANALYSIS OF NYSESLAT - To become aware and knowledgeable In NYSESLAT scores and understand the implications of the data. Teachers will analyze data with the ELL Coordinator and understand how the data will guide their lessons and their differentiated planning. The data will provide teachers the opportunity to create and implement tasks that allow students to be cognitively engaged and respond in a variety of ways to develop language acquisition in reading, writing, speaking, and listening.ENL TECHNIQUES AND STRATEGIES - To become knowledgeable of ESL techniques. To develop methods of embedding ESL strategies in all content areas. Developing scaffolding techniques for English Language Learners, such as using "think -alouds", Graphic Organizers, activating prior knowledge, cooperative group techniques, Think-Pair-Share, and using a variety of instructional tools to enhance learning.AFTER-SCHOOL - The focus will be on using Best Practices for differentiated and scaffolded supports for the all students. Teachers will become knowledgeable of the Literacy components that will immerse students in variety of ways to read, write, listen, and speak. Literacy components include, but not limited to, Guided Reading, Independent Reading, Read Aloud, and Word Study.Instructional strategy groups- Teachers will construct instructional strategy groups of students for needed strategies and skills to provide intensive intervention using a variety of materials and/or programs.WRITING - By analyzing student's writing pieces and scoring various student writing, teachers will gain a better understanding of individual student needs. Teachers will have a deeper understanding of the students' writing process according to grade level expectations. They will analyze and develop rubrics that target the writing traits within each writing genre; narrative, informative/explanatory, and opinion pieces. VTS: Visual Thinking Strategies - Students need to development their language skills. VTS uses teaching and thinking through discussion of art. Students articulate ideas drawn from examining art, and respond to each other’s comments. Verbalization is the key. To learn to facilitate open-ended discussions about sequenced works of art using developmentally based questions and a supportive method of responding to student participation teachers will receive support for Brooklyn Field support Center and from ENL Consultant. Type of PD Dates(s) Type of PD Dates(s) Type of PD Dates(s) Type of PD Dates(s) 2018-19 CEP 50  Part C: Professional Development Type of PD Dates(s) Opening of School September 2018 Engaging Students : October 2018 Multiple Entry Points / November 2018 Response to Intervention December 2018 Instructional Planning January 2019 Facilitator: Admin Facilitator: Leadership PD Team Facilitator: Staff Members Facilitator: Leadership/ Staff Facilitator: Leadership/Staff Participants: Whole Staff Participants: Whole Staff Participants: Whole Staff Participants: Whole Staff Participants: Whole Staff Determination/Need Determination/Need Determination/Need Determination/Need Determination/Need At the beginning of the year it is necessary to make sure all staff members are familiar with the Instructional Shifts and Framework for Great Schools , expectations of the CCLS, school policies and procedures and the ADVANCE system: Measure of Teacher Practice) Chancellor’s Citywide Instructional Expectations: 2016-2017 Instructional Focus Based on our school 2016 Spring ELA Data 16% of our students are reading at a level 3 or 4 Teachers will revisit Literacy Curriculum to focus on CLOSE Reading to target specific skills based on 2016 ELA item analysis / Formative Baseline Assessments that students on each grade need to improve modify instruction as needed to meet the needs of all their learners. General Education ; Dual Language ESL; ICT/ 12:1:1 classroom environment expectations /resources to meet the needs of all learners : What makes each classroom unique to focus the needs of our students based on school wide instructional focus: Engaging Students in Learning 3c 2018-19 CEP 51  Part C: Professional Development Grouping of Students based on needs Use identified priority areas to develop goals for the RTI Action Plan Develop understanding of how to analyze a specific RtI tool (screening, intervention) Decide on areas for ongoing PD provider support & training Discuss school specific RTI issues Work with staff to ensure that essential questions connect to the real world and push students to contemplate larger challenges. Rigor Relevance Framework. To successfully implement a rigorous interdisciplinary curriculum where all students including English Language Learner and Students with disabilities, must demonstrate their thinking, be cognitively engaged and make meaning of their learning, teachers will use the Rigor Relevance Framework for planning in all content areas Activities/Topics Activities/Topics Activities/Topics Activities/Topics Activities/Topics · · · · · · · · what engaging students in learning means using Fft rubric: HE components · Assessments to asses student learning · F&amp;P Baseline Assessment · Curriculum Web Mapping · ELL Push-in Begins · Kagan Cooperative Learning Strategies · NYSESLAT Data Analysis · Teacher Teams Inquiry Cylce Analyze F&P Data, Math Baselines and ELA/Math 2016 Item Analysis for · · · · · · · · · Changes in InstructionIndividual/Small Groups LevelClass/Course Level Individual/Small Groups Level Class/Course Level ICT Model/ ESL/12:1 Use of Visuals /Realia/Technology and Self Reflection and Assessment Response to Intervention Resources Visual Thinking Strategies Analyzing Math and ELA Units to incorpate strategies for ELL and SWD Individual/Small Groups Level Staff Handbook; Safety Plan Chancellor’s Regulations School-Wide Instructional Focus: Danielson 3b;Engaging Students in Learning ENL Policy and Part 154 SESIS / 408&nbsp; Compliance : Curriculum Overview Literacy Expectations/June F&amp;P Data Google drive as platform assessments &nbsp;Math Expectations for 206-2017:Use of Baseline and Mid-Year and End of Year 2018-19 CEP 52  Name and identify the ways in which they are offering multiple means of representation, Identify new opportunities to remove barriers to learning by allowing for multiple means Rigor Relationship Relevance framework PD. Rigor Lesson Plan Guide Lines/Rigor Class/Course Level Connection to DOK How essential is it? GREAT LEAPS/Guided Reading Progress Monitoring Alignment with CCLS and Assessing through Multiple Modalities and Mutiple Entry Part C: Professional Development · · · · · · Points to a lesson · Meter · expression and engagement. · of representation, expression, and engagement. FfT/CEP Alignment FfT/CEP Alignment FfT/CEP Alignment FfT/CEP Alignment FfT/CEP Alignment FfT Components:3b; 1a;1c1e; FfT Components: 1a,1e,3b,3c, 3d FfT Components: 1a,1e,3b,3c, 3d FfT Components: 1a, 1b, 3a,3b,3c, FfT Components: 1a, 1e,3b,3c, 3d,4e Reinforcement/Follow-Up Reinforcement/Follow-Up Reinforcement/Follow-Up Reinforcement/Follow-Up Reinforcement/Follow-Up Grade Team Meetings Informal Class visits Feedback Professional Development Survey Grade Team Meetings New Teacher Mentoring Professional Development Survey Grade Team Meetings New Teacher Mentoring Observation Feedback Classroom Intervisitations Grade Team Meetings Department Team Meetings New Teacher Mentoring Observation Feedback Department Team Meetings New Teacher Mentoring Observation Feedback Type of PD Dates(s) Type of PD Dates(s) 2018-19 CEP 53  Part C: Professional Development Type of PD Dates(s) Type of PD Dates(s) Type of PD Dates(s) Instructional Planning February 2019 Assessing Students March 2019 Midyear Data Reflection; Testing April 2019 CCLS Alignment Essential Qs May 2019 Performance Assessments June 2019 Facilitator: Leadership PD Team Facilitator: Leadership PD Team Facilitator: Leadership PD Team Facilitator: Leadership PD Team Facilitator: Leadership PD Team Participants: Whole Staff Participants: Whole Staff Participants: Whole Staff Participants: Whole Staff Participants: Whole Staff Determination/Need Determination/Need Determination/Need Determination/Need Determination/Need Rigor Relevance Framework. To successfully implement a rigorous interdisciplinary curriculum where all students including English Language Learner and Students with disabilities, must demonstrate their thinking, be cognitively engaged and make meaning of their learning, teachers will use the Rigor Relevance Framework for planning in all content areas Assessment is fully integrated into instruction, through extensive use of formative assessment. Students appear to be aware of, and there is some evidence that they have contributed to, the assessment criteria. Questions and assessments are used regularly to diagnose evidence of learning by individual students. A variety 2018-19 CEP 54  Rigor Relationship Relevance framework PD Name and identify the ways in which they are offering multiple means of representation, Part C: Professional Development of forms of feedback, from both teacher and peers, is accurate and specific and advances learning. Students self-assess and monitor their own progress. successfully differentiates instruction to address individual students’ misunderstandings. We typically use March as an opportunity to review midyear data, create plans for small group and individual instruction. In addition, we need to review the testing procedures to ensure that all teachers are able to provide an appropriate testing environment for students, both with and without testing accommodations. As we prepare for June and begin to draft new curricula focusing on essential questions will allow us to incorporate previous PD workshops as well as work with staff to ensure that essential questions connect to the real world and push students to contemplate larger challenges. In May teachers will have given the second round of performance assessments and we want to provide staff with an opportunity to analyze the data and reflect on their planning and instruction as they prepare to draft new curricula for next year. Activities/Topics Activities/Topics Activities/Topics Activities/Topics Activities/Topics · · expression and engagement. Identify new opportunities to remove barriers to learning by allowing for multiple means of representation, expression, and engagement. Assessing Students Students indicate that they clearly understand the characteristics of high-quality work, and there is evidence that students have helped establish the evaluation criteria. • The teacher is constantly “taking the pulse” of the class; monitoring of student understanding is sophisticated and continuous and makes use of strategies to elicit information about individual student understanding. • Students monitor their own understanding, either on their own initiative • High-quality feedback comes from many sources, including students; it is specific and · Continue to Build Teacher Capacity around PD Reviewing Midyear Data · · Procedures · · · · · · Essential Questions · Individual/Small Groups Level Class/Course Level Testing Procedures Review of NYSED, NYCDOE and PS 123 Testing Procedures Practice with Distributing and Collecting Test Materials Individual/Small Groups Level Class/Course Level Testing Procedures Role in Backwards Planning 2018-19 CEP 55 focused on improvement.Developing a Shared Understanding of 4e: Understanding Data from Midpoint Assessments Changes in InstructionIndividual/Small Groups LevelClass/Course Level Testing  Outcomes Subgroups of students Areas of strength Reflections and next steps Connection to DOK How essential is it? Alignment with CCLS and Assessing through Multiple Modalities Part C: Professional Development · · · Spring Performance Assessments · · · · FfT/CEP Alignment FfT/CEP Alignment FfT/CEP Alignment FfT/CEP Alignment FfT/CEP Alignment FfT Components: 1a, 1e,3b,3c, 3d,4e FfT Components: 3d FfT Components: 1a, 1c, 3d, 4e FfT Components: 1a, 1b, 2a, 3b. 3c. 3d.4e FfT Components: 1a, 1b, 2a, 3b. 3c. 3d.4e Reinforcement/Follow-Up Reinforcement/Follow-Up Reinforcement/Follow-Up Reinforcement/Follow-Up Reinforcement/Follow-Up Grade Team Meetings Department Team Meetings Observation Feedback February Staff Development Grade Team Meetings Department Team Meetings Observation Feedback Grade Team Meetings Department Team Meetings Observation Feedback Grade Team Meetings Department Team Meetings Observation Feedback Department Team Meetings Observation Feedback rationale schedule and duration topics to be covered name of provider how parents will be notified of these activities Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. · · · · · Begin description here: Rationale: In order to keep our parents informed and well engaged, we will provide a variety of workshops and meetings on a monthly basis. Parents are provided with strategies and materials they can use at home to support their child's learning across the content areas. Parents have been made aware of the resources on the D.O.E. website, PS123K WEBSITE and brochures/materials. Each teacher has provided all parents with access to the reading program MyOn for further reading comprehension support. Monthly workshops will continue to be based on Home-School instructional connections. In addition, throughout the year the Language Access Coordinator (LAC), Robert Pena Diaz, is working diligently with both parents and staff 2018-19 CEP 56  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities to support communication by eliminating the language barrier and giving both constituents a voice. Schedule and duration: On a monthly basis throughout the academic year. Topics to be covered: Monthly meetings and/or workshops include topics regarding the NYSESLAT, ELA, State Math Test, Science Test, and End-of-Unit Assessments provided by all teachers, according to grades. Name of provider: Ms. Parache (Principal), Ms. Marisol Rivera (Parent Coordinator), Ms. Jazzy Rivera (PTA President), Ms. Samuels-Guillen (ENL Teacher for Parents), Sandra Guzman (Nutritionist from Cornell University), and Dual Language/ENL Team members. How parents will be notified of these activities: Parents are notified via letters sent home and monthly calendars. All documents will be sent home in parents preferred language. Record Maintenance: A binder will archive all agendas and attendance sheets reflecting event activity. Activities/Meetings/Events: The ENL Teacher held three ENL Parent Orientations to ensure the attendance of all Parents of our ELL newcomers to inform them of the ELL identification process, Parent Choice of programs, and entitlement procedures. The monthly "Coffee with the Principal" is a meeting that both the principal and parents attend to discuss topics related to organizing school events, upcoming events, volunteering, school and community goals, and building positive family relationships. The meeting is geared to building a partnership between the school and all families for the purpose of working together to create a community of learners and thinkers. Monthly meetings held by our Parent Coordinator, Ms. Marisol Rivera, including awareness of health, community resources available, citizenship, and nutrition. Parent skills workshops will take place Oct.-Jan. 11th on Wednesdays from 9-12. Nutrition workshops will take place from Jan.-Mar. on Wednesdays from 9-11. There will also be a Back to School Anxiety Workshop in October, a How to Help Your Child Succeed in School workshop in November, a How to Prevent Bullying at Home workshop in December, a Cool Culture workshop in January, a Healthy Eating Workshop in February, an ID New York workshop in March, a Homebase (housing) workshop in April, Asthma workshop in May, and a How to Teach your child integrity workshop in June. All teachers are utilizing the designated time every Tuesday afternoon to contact parents and provide useful information that they can use at home to assist with homework and monthly projects. Our ENL Liaison will specifically target all ENL parents, by grade, in December and provide in-depth information on the NYSESLAT exam. The information will include the organization and structure of the test, by grade, what skills each modality will target according to grade, types of questions, writing genre, and the variety of text provided for reading. The ENL Liaison will then provide specific learning tools and strategies parents can use at home to help enhance academic learning and language development. Family Celebrations are held by each classroom to teacher at the end of every unit in reading and writing, cultural and holiday celebrations in which parents are invited to come to the school to take part in their child's learning environment. These celebrations serve as a platform for parents to have a better insight of the academic accomplishments of their child and take a closer view of 2018-19 CEP 57  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities the end product of their individual and detailed learning process. Parents are welcomed to take part of this learning process and encouraged to continue to support at home, with our continued guidance. Our DL liaison is conducting monthly enrichment pd for with various topics to assist parents in supporting their child(ren) at home. Topics include, but are not limited to, vocabulary, reading skills, making meaningful conversation, NYSESLAT, math and science in the home, raising a bilingual child, social studies in your neighborhood, and more. For parents, we will offer several classes monthly for parents in ENL, computer, math, nutrition, arts and crafts. In addition, we have parent workshops delivered in Spanish by school staff on various topics of interest, including curricular and technology. E.N.L. Program for our Parents - The ESL Program is offered, 5 days a week from 8:30 - 11:30 a.m., to our parents to provide support and instruction in the English language, American culture, and academic and cognitive areas which will enable them to become successful partners in our schools, the community, and most important in their children's education. Translation and Interpretation Services are offered to increase the involvement of parents in our school. This Title III, funding is used to translate important policy and procedural documents, mainly in Spanish. The Parent Handbook, Student and Parent Behavioral Contract, and ENL Entitlement Letters are the documents we have made available. Translation and interpretation services are put in place as needed. Additionally, interpretation services are a daily practice we have in place as communication between school staff and parents. Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits) 1. 2. Purchased services 1. Per session Per diem High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials 2. Must be supplemental. Additional curricula, instructional materials. Must be clearly listed. 3. 4. 2018-19 CEP 58 Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL 2018-19 CEP 59  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 32 School Name The Suydam Magnet School for STEAM Borough Brooklyn School Number 123 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Arelis Parache Coach Griselda Quiles ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Robert Peña Díaz Teacher/Subject Area Daisy Lopez/ESL Magnet Res Teacher/Subject Area n/a Related-Service Provider Aridia Cabrera-Castillo Superintendent Sheila Gorski Assistant Principal Ms. Carmen Soto Coach n/a School Counselor Luz Marte Parent Jazzy Rivera Parent Coordinator Marisol Rivera Field Support Center Staff Member . Other (Name and Title) . C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 7 N/A Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification 6 Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 3 3 6 2 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 6 3 D. Student Demographics 2018-19 CEP 60  Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 623 Total number of ELLs 241 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 38.68% Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Yes NoFreestanding ENL Yes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Spanish/English Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Opened (e.g., 2013-14) Lang. Spanish 2011-2016 Program TBE TBE TBE DL K 1 1 1 2 1 3 1 4 1 1 1 DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 1 1 1 5 1 1 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 6 0 0 6 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? After reviewing the 2016-2017 NYSESLAT Writing data, 10 of the 203 students were proficient in tested this modality . it is evident that our students are still in need of support with the writing modality. Each grade band uses curriculum-embedded assessments (both formal and summative) to inform their instruction, group their English Language Learners according to their needs, and adequately support their ELL students. Fountas and Pinnell is used to measure the students' reading growth and PS 123 administers a non-fiction writing base, mid, and endline to measure and portray the student growth. in writing. All grades are using Project Based Learning Curriculum in which students gain knowledge and skills by working for an extended period of time to investigate and respond to an authentic, engaging and complex question, problem, or challenge. Grades K-2 are using Wilson's Fundations, a research-based multi-sensory, structured language program, to support their 2018-19 CEP 61  students to learn to read in a fun way while addressing the foundational skills, emphasizing: Furthermore, Grades K-2 have a Universal Literacy Coach providing class and grade specific support to help children (including ELLs) in their literacy acquisition. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? Staff members have common prep planning time, are placed into inquiry teams, use Monday Professional Learning Sessions, and are provided time to review data, discuss results, and plan next steps to help monitor, support, and move our ELL students. An Excel data spreadsheet was created to help the school have uniformity in tracking their data. The spreadsheet graphs the results and makes comparison easy to demonstrate growth and areas of concern or achievement. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? Students are in need of improving their reading comprehension, writing, and math skills. Students are assessed throughout the year with formative and summative assessments. Each teacher assesses their classroom with a Base, Mid, and End-line exam in Reading, Writing, and Mathematics. For reading, the teachers use Fountas and Pinnell. For writing, each grade is provided a writing prompt. For Math, the benchmark for Base, Mid, and End comes from GO Math! and EngageNY. Also, grades K-2 use the Fundations benchmarks to monitor and track student progress in word work. In addition to the summative assessments above, The Dual Language team uses the benchmarks provided by McGraw-Hill's Wonders (English) and Maravillas (Spanish) to benchmark their children and the ENIL to monitor reading growth when students approach high reading levels in Spanish. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? Teacher use the EDAT tool, formative and summative assessments, benchmark (beg, mid, and endline) assessments to monitor progress and measure growth and areas in need of improvement. Once the data is collected and analyzed via weekly data articulation meetings with Principal and through weekly teacher teams data is analyzed to inform teachers their lessons and planning. Lesson Plans are data informed and tailored to the students' academic and language acquisition needs. Dual language and ENL freestanding classes use language objectives to further support the ELL students. Teachers are required to have students working in differentiated groups and also are provided a daily RTI slot to further support their students in the skills they need. The Math Coach, AIS Literacy Team, SETTS teachers pull out students academic intervention services. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] Every teacher is required to use formative and summative assessments to inform them about the students in need of improvement. Teachers are provided and RTI period to provide activities that will address the needs of the student and further enrich him/her. In addition, the teacher teams design an inquiry plan for the school academic year that will target and address the needs of the students to help support them in mastering a skill or strategy. Assessment and data collecting is ongoing during this time and the inquiry work is completed in 3 cycles. Every week, the teams meet review, discuss, and decide the next steps according to the data. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. The 2016-2017 ELL Data Analysis Tool is used to inform the teachers of their students who are ELLs, Non-ELLs, and Former ELLs. In addition, it provides useful information (e.g. at risk students and why, modality scores on State exams, and etc.) The NYS 2016-2017 ELA, Math, and NYSESLAT state test scores are also reviewed and used to help tailor teacher lessons, grouping, and support. Currently, our school has 241 ell students who are eligible to take the NYSESLAT. Of the 241 ELLs, none are long term ELLs, 33 are with at-risk level 3 and 13 are at-risk level 5. Nineteen ELLs are at 5 or 6 years of service. Writing and speaking have been identified as the modalities greatest in need. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? Teachers are provided documentation with the students state test scores. In addition, they are provided a list that informs them on their students NYSESLAT level, the amount of minutes they will be serviced weekly, and a copy of the EDAT tool 2018-19 CEP 62  reflecting their class. They are provided adequate professional development to learn and understand how to help support their students. They are required and trained to collect, analyze, and use the data to inform and tailor their lessons to the needs of their students. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. We currently have 1 freestanding ENL classroom for grades K, 1, 2, 3, and 4. Students with heterogeneous levels (e.g. entering to expanding) are placed in one classroom. This type of program is by parent choice (e.g. other alternatives TBE or DL). Students receive their instruction and services by a well-trained ENL/TESOL pedagogue that provides the necessary scaffolds in order to learn the thematic based units. Teachers are dually certified b. TBE program. If applicable. N/A c. DL program. If applicable. Students in a Dual Language program are placed in the program by parent choice as an alternative to Freestanding ESL. The Dual Language program is a rigorous program that uses two languages for instruction: English and Spanish. The intended student ratio is 50:50 (50% ELLs, 50% native speakers). The program uses a roller coaster model that is thematic based. Students are taught one day in English and then it continues without repetition in Spanish the next day. There is a Dual Language classroom in each grade from Pre-K-5th. All content areas are taught with differentiated instruction to address each student's needs, whether an ELL or EP, and to enrich their learning experience. Students are grouped according to their needs and supported to make academic gains. Data is actively and constantly recorded, reviewed, and used to inform the teacher on their students' needs and gains. Benchmarks, formative, and summative assessments are used as well. 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? The mandated minutes of support required are indicated by the student's score on the NYSESLAT or NYSITELL exam. Their level determines how many minutes of service they are entitled to a week (e.g. 180 minutes, 360 minutes, or 90 minutes of maintenance support). Once the student's level is determined, the parent choice form is observed. Depending on program availability and parent choice, the child is placed in their classroom setting. If the child is in a Dual Language or Freestanding ESL classroom, that classroom teacher provides the mandated services for the student in all content area. If the child is placed in a General or Special Education classroom, they receive the integrated and standalone services by the ENL/Dual Language coordinator, ENL Magnet Resource Specialist, or a trained ENL pedagogue to support them in all content area. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. Freestanding ESL: Core content is delivered in English. Dual Language: Core content is delivered in two languages (English/Spanish) that alternate each day. 2018-19 CEP 63  ESL strategies and methodologies are provided through the Common Core Literacy and Math Programs, ”Core Knowledge, “Go Math", ”Wonders”, and Portland. In the Dual Language classes, small group instruction is provided during the day by a Reading Teacher, ESL Teacher, and Common branch Teacher either Bilingual or Monolingual. Other subjects such as word study, and literacy centers. Teachers use multi-level approaches in the teaching of Language Arts to limited English proficient/English Language Learners. An emphasis is placed on amplifying lessons to better meet the needs of students. When pushing in during content area instruction, ESL providers work collaboratively with content area teachers and classroom teachers in planning lessons that incorporate vocabulary development, ESL methodologies and ESL scaffolding. ESL Media Specialist teachers push in during content area once or twice a week to various classrooms across grades K - 5. We have ESL/ AIS providers who push into classes to provide additional support to students at risk and new arrivals to the country. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? ELLs in Dual Language classes are evaluated in their native language using Fountas and Pinnell Reading Assessment Profile (WRAP) and America Reading's ENIL in Spanish Assessments to assess second language proficiency levels for English Proficient students in these programs. Throughout the academic school year, students are provided by formative and summative assessments to monitor the levels, progress, and needs of the students. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status All ELLs are provided their mandated periods of ENL instruction by certified teachers in the implementation of ENL methodologies and best practices. Students are also provided with Bilingual AIS support including Newcomers, Developing, Long Term and Former ELLs. Teachers work in small groups and offer many techniques such as modeling, prompting, NLA support, and use of visual aides. Students who have exited the ELL status are offered their testing accommodations and will be provided their 90 minutes of ENL instruction in the Integrates approach with two teaching co-teaching. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? We offer our ELLs-SWD intervention in ELA and Math as well as other content areas through after school programs. The ELL Academy After School Program for grades 3-5 provides instruction and practice for editing, constructive responses, short responses, extended responses and how to use graphic organizers to organize information. This program is correlated to meet the new ELA core curriculum standards and the Common Core Learning Standards. We also offer math intervention that incorporates the teaching of Math using a math program that provides instruction matched to the New York Math State Test. Teachers teach in small groups in order to differentiate the instruction and target specific skills that students are struggling with. This program also offers ELLs a program that is tailored in teaching academic vocabulary and word solving strategies for content area reading in Science and Social Studies. ELLs are provided intervention using Rally Reading Program through a Bilingual/ESL Service Provider. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? Push in ESL teachers push into ICT classrooms during content area. Support personnel such as reading teachers, ESL, Social Studies, ,math, science, art, and music are invited and encouraged to attend common prep planning sessions with the grades they mostly service. ESL for example, has one common prep a week with a particular grade. During this time, they plan for the week. In addition to the common planning prep, each grade has a data period where they review their classroom data to create target and RTI groups to support in particular content areas, skill sets and strategies. All staff members who work directly or provide a service for an ELL-SWD are encouraged to read the child's IEP and sign off on a 504 form. They are encouraged to plan with the student's IEP goals in mind and address their needs. 2018-19 CEP 64  8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. We offer our ELLs intervention in ELA and Math as well as other content areas through after school programs. The ELL Academy After School Program for grades 3-5 provides rigorous instruction and practice in text complexity, editing constructive responses, short responses, extended responses and in using graphic organizers to organize information. This program is correlated to the new ELA core curriculum standards and Common Core Learning Standards. We also offer math intervention that incorporates the teaching of Math using a math program that provides instruction matched to the New York Math State Test and Common Core Learning Standards. Teachers teach in small groups in order to differentiate the instruction and target specific skills that students are struggling with. This program also offers ELLs a program that is tailored in teaching them academic vocabulary and word solving strategies for content area reading in Science and Social Studies. When possible, ELLs are provided supplemental periods of ESL and reading instruction in addition to the mandated periods they receive as per NYS CR Part 154. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? Imagine Learning Web-based resource to support our students , Language Power Reading Program and our ENL Providers will continue pushing in to the classroom to provide the mandated services to our ELLs. If scheduling permits, teachers will provide supplementary support periods to classrooms of ELLs and work in small group using ENL methodologies. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? N/A 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. At P.S.123K, all English Language Learners participate in all school activities and programs such as Art, Gym, Music, and Technology . Students are not pulled out of their classrooms as we offer push-in services only. We provide explicit ENL services during literacy and content area instruction. Students are given the opportunity to attend after school programs through the Title III supplemental program. During this time, students work in smaller group settings and receive small group instruction. Students are provided literacy and mathematical support in areas of need. The dual language classrooms will provide additional support in native language acquisition as well continue strengthening the English skills students need to acquire English proficiency. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. Teachers use technology to support their teaching such as Smart boards, document readers, laptops, listening centers, Ipads, books with CD’s, etc. In addition, ESL strategies and methodologies are provided across all content areas. Teachers provide students with needed scaffolds during instruction. Teachers are using the ESL components in the new literacy and math curriculum to provide instruction for ELLs. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? In the dual language programs, native language arts is provided during literacy stations, word study, content area and math block to develop mathematical skills in the student’s home language. Our team annually revisits the Language Allocation Policy created by teachers and administrators. The LAP details how instruction is being provided to our ELLs in both English and Spanish. Content Area instruction in science and social studies is taught in both languages. The Reading and Writing program is only available in Spanish. Students receive literacy instruction and Math instruction in their native language as well as in English. A Science and Math glossary was provided to the dual and bilingual classes in grades K-5 to support both ESL and SSL instruction. All classrooms have computers, Smart Boards, and document readers to facilitate delivery of instruction in both classrooms. In the ENL freestanding classrooms, students whom speak the same languages are partnered to support one another in their 2018-19 CEP 65  Home language (e.g. buddy system ). Teachers label their rooms, provide students with vocabulary cards and folders, word banks, word walls, cognate walls, bilingual dictionaries and glossaries, and many other bilingual resources to enrich the target language and provide a reference in the home language . Diversity is valued, acknowledged, and celebrated in all classrooms. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. All required services and resources correspond to our students’ ages and grade levels accordingly. When appropriate, differentiation of instruction and materials is taken into consideration to better amplify academic instruction. Students are also provided with high interest books that are age appropriate for them. Students are supported academically with visuals, prompts, scaffolds, and a buddy system. Students are exposed to cognates to support their Spanish language and make the connection to learning English. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? N/A 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). Newly enrolled ELL students and their parents are given a parent orientation that details all the programs offered in our school. Parents are invited to meet the teacher during the start of the school year where the program and expectations for the students are addressed. In addition through Title III - Immigrant plan funding, the newly arrived students are invited to participate in an after-school program, where they can meet students just like them and learn through a fun and creative way using Reader's Theater. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? N/A 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? a. The model used is a self-contained 50/50 roller coaster model. The intended ratio is 50:50 where 50% of the students are ELLs and the other 50% are native English speakers. This creates an environment where the students can support each other in language acquisition. All content areas are taught in each language. The language of instruction alternates daily. Students are taught thematic-based units that allots them to learn both languages. b. All core content areas are taught in both English and Spanish. c. Language is separated for instruction using a 2-week cycle. The language of instruction alternates daily. Week 1 is an English dominant week where the language of instruction in all content area is conducted on 3 days (Monday, Wednesday, and Friday). The remaining 2 days (Tuesday and Thursday) instruction is in Spanish. Then, the 2nd week it switches where the week is a Spanish dominant week (3 days) and English instruction is for 2 days. d. The language of instruction is neither sequential or simultaneous. The language of instruction 2018-19 CEP 66  alternates according to the 2-week cycle. This provides a faithfulness to the language of instruction for both languages. Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? Teachers receive information during staff development days, curriculum meetings, and common prep planning sessions. Teachers are provided with a toolkit of ESL strategies they can use to assist and support our ELLs in language acquisition. Articles and professional texts are made available to all teachers during the year. Such information consists of the various needs of our ELLs such as understanding second language development, specific strategies needed to support the development of listening, speaking, reading and writing skills, the various types of ELLs such as long term ELLs, newly incoming ELLs, and SIFE, multiple entry points, vocabulary development such as Tier I, II, III, and cognates, scaffolding techniques and developing vocabulary, and Language Allocation Policy discussions and planning. Teachers take part in inter visitation visits across grades and classes. A follow up debriefing always takes place where best practices are discussed as well as next steps. Teachers turkey information to other staff members during various times in the year and at grade meetings. The ENL providers have been given a common prep period with the grade they mostly service in order to plan ahead for future lessons and to familiarize themselves with the new curriculum. All members of our staff are involved in weekly teacher teams meetings where student work is analyzed . Inquiry teams discussions are also gathered around the needs and learning trends of their students such as English Language Learners. They discuss successful and effective techniques that support the teaching of ELLs in developing skills in reading, writing and math critical thinking skills as well as supports our ELLs in all four modalities (reading, speaking, writing, and listening). All the teachers in our school attend professional development on Mondays on various topics that addresses teacher and student needs. Date: Monday PDs Topic: Facilitator: September 11, 2017 September 18, 2017 1) Language Access 2) PBL planning for ELLs R. Peña Díaz Magnet Resource Specialists: G. Quiles, D. Lopez October 16, 2017 October 23, 2017 1) PBL for Specialists with focus on ELLS 2) Language Objectives P. Inestroza R. Peña Díaz November 20, 2017 EDAT Tool R. Peña Díaz December 11, 2017 Planning using the CBALL template 2018-19 CEP 67  R. Peña Díaz January 8, 2018 ELLs with Science & S.S. Ms. Lubecka & Ms. Konrad February 12, 2018 Using the ELL’s native language to support target language acquisition R. Peña Díaz March 12, 2018 ELLs & Math R. Peña Díaz April 16, 2018 Scaffolds & Differentiation R. Peña Díaz May 14, 2018 Making learning vocabulary fun and interactive R. Peña Díaz June 11, 2018 Supporting ELL SWDs R. Peña Díaz All teachers of ELLs have received training on the CCLS since it was first implemented. During teacher observations, the standards taught are highlighted and discussed during post conferences. All the ESL teachers have a common prep where they work with the teachers on the grades they service. Extra supplementary support periods are given to teachers with the most ELLs even if they are self contained dually certified ENL teachers. The supplementary support enables teachers to work with small groups on diverse needs. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. The school will provide a minimum of 15% of the required professional development hours for all teachers prescribed by CR Part 154.2. This Professional Development will be dedicated to language acquisition with a focus on best practices for co-teaching strategies and integrating language and content instruction for ELLs. For Dual and ENL teachers a minimum of 50% of the required professional development hours must be dedicated to language acquisition in alignment with core content (Science, Social Studies, Math) including a focus on best practices for co-teaching strategies and integrating language and content instruction for ELLs. All professional development attendance sheets are kept in binders by the Principals and/or teachers. During the school year 2015-2016 teachers will be invited to attend professional development on the teaching of ELLs and present to the school staff. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? P.S. 123K values and respects the parental involvement in the decision-making of their children's education. As a result, our school will use Parent Engagement Tuesdays to discuss student goals and the language progress of individual students with their parents. Teachers will share best practices and ways the parents can support their child at home. These meeting will take place throughout the school year through both phone calls, and one on one meetings. Teachers will keep records of when such meetings took place. If a translator is necessary, the school will provide one. Parent Workshops will be provided to 2018-19 CEP 68  parents throughout the year on the goals of all programs. (Oct. 25 - Social Studies & the communities around you, Nov. 22 - Raising a Bilingual Child, Dec. 13 - Reading Comprehension & supporting your child, Jan. 17 - NYSESLAT Explained, Feb. 15 - Math & Science in the home, Mar. 14 - Writing with Meaning & Details, Apr. 11 - Culture as an asset in the classroom, May 16 - Technology as a support, not a replacement, and June 13 - Enriching & continuing Education over the summer.) There will be morning and afternoon sessions on the same day for each workshop. Additionally, parents are provided with an explanation of the state and city standards, the new CCLS, the core curriculum, assessments, student expectations and general educational program requirements. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Parent Workshops throughout the year are scheduled that keep families up to date on important school information and testing. STEAM Sept 19, 2017 : Home School Connection with Engineering , (Oct. 23, 2017 STEAM: Exploring the Scientific Process: Hands -On Learning , Nov. 22 - Raising a Bilingual Child, Dec. 13 - Reading Comprehension & supporting your child, Jan. 17 - NYSESLAT Explained, Feb. 15 - Math & Science in the home, Mar. 14 - Writing with Meaning & Details, Apr. 11 - Culture as an asset in the classroom, May 16 - Technology as a support, not a replacement, and June 13 - Enriching & continuing Education over the summer.) There will be morning and afternoon sessions on the same day for each workshop. • Family STEAM Curriculum Night- parents and students share wonderful STEAM activities rooted in all parts of the STEAM Acronym ( Science, Technology, Engineering, Arts, and Math ) • Math Night - parents and students share wonderful experiences in math as they rotate through different centers. Parents and their children have an opportunity to play mathematical games and problem solve together. • Newsletters are sent home on a monthly basis as an additional means to communicate to parents important schools events, and goals for each subject area each month. • Chorus: - selected classes participate and are responsible for a school-wide performance at the end of the year. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Ps 123 is a recipient of a Magnet Grant for Science Technology Engineering Arts and Mathematics and all students including our ELLs will receive enrichment programs before, after school and supports through Project Based Learning during the school day. 2018-19 CEP 69 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Arelis Parache, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 CEP 70  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: 123 Suydam School DBN: 32K123 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Arelis Parache Title Principal Carmen Soto Assistant Principal Marisol Rivera Parent Coordinator Robert Peña Díaz ENL/Bilingual Teacher Jazzy Rivera Daisy Lopez Parent Teacher/Subject Area Griselda Quiles Teacher/Subject Area N/A N/A Luz Marte Sheila Gorski . Aridia Cabrera-Castillo N/A N/A Coach Coach School Counselor Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member N/A Other Related-Service Provider Other N/A Other N/A Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 06/28/2017 06/28/2017 06/28/2017 06/28/2017 06/28/2017 06/28/2017 06/28/2017 N/A N/A 06/28/2017 06/28/2017 06/28/2017 06/28/2017 N/A N/A 2018-19 CEP 71  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 32K123 School Name: The SuydamMagnet School for STEAM Superintendent: Sheila Gorski The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Robert Peña Díaz ENL/Bilingual Program Coordinator Yes Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. PS 123K uses the HLIS Survey: Parent Language Preference for all oral and written communication about their child's academics. In addition, blue emergency cards, ATS Reports, school-based parent surveys, and through informal and formal conversations with parents with families is used to assess language preferences. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. 2018-19 CEP 72 Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral 9 6 174 1 372 1 1 1.6 1.06 30.85 0.18 65.96 0.18 0.18 9 6 170 1 376 1 1 1.6 1.06 30.14 0.18 66.67 0.18 0.18 Arabic Chinese Any English Russian Spanish Tibetan Vietnamese 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. N/A Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Parent School Based Survey After School Programs Permission Slips Interim Progress Reports School Events Report Cards PTA Parent-Teacher Conferences Beginning, Middle, End of School Year/ LAC and other staff members will translate Throughout School Year LAC and other staff members will translate Throughout the School Year LAC and other staff members will translate 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide Parent Teacher Conferences September 17th, November 13th, and March 12th. interpretation service(s)? Parent Coordinator, Guidance Counselor, Related Services Providers, LAC, other staff members, language 2018-19 CEP 73  Teacher Meetings (As solicited) (e.g. Tuesday Parent Engagement Sessions) September – June Monthly Family Celebrations September – June Curriculum Night May 15th line, and the Big Word will provide interpretation services. Parent Coordinator, Guidance Counselor, Related Services Providers, LAC, other staff members, language line, and the Big Word will provide interpretation services. Parent Coordinator, Guidance Counselor, Related Services Providers, LAC, other staff members, language line, and the Big Word will provide interpretation services. Parent Coordinator, Guidance Counselor, Related Services Providers, LAC, other staff members, language line, and the Big Word will provide interpretation services. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. Families will be contacted either by a staff member that speaks their language, a staff member using language line, phone messenger to deliver message in native language, and/or receive a written document in the families’ native languages. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Our school’s LAC will provide a PD for staff that will inform them on the ways they can reach out and communicate with the families who speak a language other than English. They will be trained on how to use over-the-phone interpreters (e.g. Language Line), will be provided a list of staff that speak languages other than English, guide to and share the T&I Unit resources that are available on the DOE intranet, and informed on how to request an interpreter or document to be translated by a staff member who speaks that language or using the services of Big Word. In addition, a document was generated that informs the school staff on what languages are available for interpretation/translation by a staff member in the school. Furthermore, the school’s LAC will work closely with the Parent Coordinator and PTA President to inform parents on the availability of and access to interpretation and translation services. A great effort to ensure that all school documents are distributed in the parent’s language of preference. Our goal is to ensure that parents know their rights, are involved in their child’s academic career, are informed and most importantly have a voice that is heard. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services 2018-19 CEP 74  Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) All parents regardless of native language will have access to all DOE documents translated in their native language. (E.g. Welcome Poster, Parent’s bill of rights, Guide to Language Access, Language ID guide, monthly parent newsletters, letters sent home to parents, report cards, IEPs, and etc.) All parent engagement events will be equipped with interpretive services via a staff who speaks the language or language line when necessary. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? Through Parent Surveys, Teacher Meetings, Coffee with Principal Meetings, and PTA meetings, we will solicit the opinions, concerns, and feedback of the parents to monitor their language access needs. In addition, free ENL classes are provided for families on a daily basis and Parent Enrichment workshops will be provided in their native language to help parents be involved in their child’s academic career and understand how to support their child. Teachers will be surveyed on how often they use Language Line and/or solicit the interpretation/translation services of a staff member or The Big Word to ensure that it is a necessity in the school and how often it is being used. 2018-19 CEP 75 
